<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p>Affairs went on in Carlingford with the usual commonplace pertinacity of human affairs. Notable events happened but seldom in anybody’s life, and matters rolled back into their ordinary routine, or found a new routine for themselves after the ordinary course of humanity. After the extraordinary advent of Nettie and her strange household⁠—after the setting-out of that wonderful little establishment, with all the amazed expectation it excited⁠—it was strange to see how everything settled down, and how calmly the framework of common life took in that exceptional and half-miraculous picture. Lookers-on prophesied that it never could last⁠—that in the very nature of things some sudden crisis or collapse must ensue, and the vain experiment prove a failure; but quiet nature and steady time prevailed over these moralists and their prophecies. The winter went on calmly day by day, and Nettie and her dependants became legitimate portions of Carlingford society. People ceased to wonder by degrees. Gradually the eyes of Carlingford grew accustomed to that dainty tiny figure sweeping along, by mere impulse of cheerful will and ceaseless activity, the three open-eyed staring children, the faded mother. Sometimes, indeed, Nettie, too clear of the necessity of her own exertions, and too simply bent upon her business, to feel any sentimental shame of her relations, was seen quickening the sluggish steps of Fred himself, who shuffled along by her side in a certain flush of self-disgust, never perceptible upon him under any other circumstances. Even Fred was duly moved by her vicinity. When he saw other people look at them, his bemused intellect was still alive enough to comprehend that people were aware of his dismal dependence upon that fairy creature, whom it was a shame to think of as the support not only of his deserted children, but of his own base comforts and idleness. But the spur, though it pricked, did not goad him into any action. When he got home, he took refuge in his room upstairs, in the hazy atmosphere drugged with the heavy fumes of his pipe, and stretched his slovenly limbs on his sofa, and buried his confused faculties in his old novel. So he lived day by day, circumscribed in the most dangerous of his indulgences by Nettie’s unhesitating strictures and rules, which nobody dared break, but unlimited in his indolence, his novel, and his pipe. That stifling fire, that close room, the ashes of the pipe on the table, the listless shabby figure on the sofa, were the most dismal part of the interior at <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s Cottage, so far as it appeared to the external eye. But it is doubtful whether <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred, spiteful and useless, with her poor health, her selfish love, her utter unreason, dawdling over trifling matters which she never completed; or the three children, entirely unrespectful of father and mother, growing up amid that wonderful subversion of the ordinary rules of nature, with some loyalty to Nettie, but no reverence in them, were not as appalling companions to live with. Nettie, however, did not consider the matter as a spectator might. She did not enter into it at all as a matter to be criticised; they simply belonged to her as they were. She knew their faults without loving them less, or feeling it possible that faults could make any difference to those bonds of nature. Fred, indeed, did afflict her lively impatient spirit;⁠—she had tried to quicken him into life at first⁠—she gave him up with a certain frank scorn now, and accepted her position. Thus he was to be all his life long this big cumberer of the ground. Nettie, valorous and simple, made up her mind to it. He was Fred⁠—that was all that could be said on the subject; and, being Fred, belonged to her, and had to be cared for like the rest.</p>
			<p>It all grew into a matter of routine as that winter glided along; outside and in, everybody came to take it for granted. Miss Wodehouse, who, with a yearning admiration of a creature so totally unlike herself, came often to visit Nettie, ceased to expostulate, almost ceased to wonder. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth no longer opened his fine eyes in amazement when that household was named. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith, their landlady, calmly brought her bills to Nettie, and forgot that it was not the most natural thing in the world that she should be paid by Miss Underwood. The only persistent sceptic was the doctor. Edward Rider could not, would not, believe it. He who had so chafed under Fred’s society, felt it beyond the bounds of human possibility that Nettie could endure him. He watched with an eagerness which he found it difficult to account for, to see the first symptoms of disgust which must ere long mark the failure of this bold but foolish venture. It occupied his mind a great deal more than was good for his own comfort; perhaps more than was best for his patients. Though he had few people to visit in that quarter of the town, his drag was seen to pass <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s Cottage most days in the week; and when urgent messages came for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider in the evening, his little groom always wended his way out through the special district of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks to find his master, if the doctor was not at home. Not that all this devotion assisted him much either in increase of friendship with his relations, or in verification of his auguries. The disgust of the young doctor, when he saw his brother’s slovenly figure in his own chair, was nothing to his disgust now, when he saw that same form, so out of accordance with the neat little sitting-room which Nettie’s presence made dainty and refined in its homeliness, lounging in Nettie’s way. He could not bring himself to speak with ordinary patience to Fred; and Fred, obtuse as he was, perceived his brother’s disgust and contempt, and resented it sullenly; and betrayed his resentment to the foolish wife, who sulked and said spiteful things to Edward. It was not a pleasant family group. As for Nettie, she was much too fully occupied to give her society or conversation to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider. She came and went while he was there, busy about a thousand things, always alert, decided, uncompromising⁠—not disinclined to snub either Fred or Susan when opportunity offered, totally unconscious even of that delicacy with which a high fantastical heroine of romance would have found it necessary to treat her dependants. It was this unconsciousness, above all, that irritated the doctor. If she had shown any feeling, he said to himself⁠—if she had even been grandly aware of sacrificing herself and doing her duty⁠—there would have been some consolation in it. But Nettie obstinately refused to be said to do her duty. She was doing her own will with an imperious distinctness and energy⁠—having her own way⁠—displaying no special virtue, but a determined wilfulness. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider was half disgusted with Nettie, to see how little disgust she showed of her companions. He was disappointed in her: he concluded to himself that she did not show that fine perception which he was disposed to expect from so dainty a little sprite. Yet, notwithstanding all these disappointed expectations, it is astonishing how he haunted that room where the society was so unattractive, and bore <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred’s spiteful speeches, and suffered his eyes and his temper to be vexed beyond endurance by the dismal sight of his brother. The children, too, worried their unfortunate uncle beyond description. He did not dislike children: as a general rule, mothers in the other end of Carlingford, indeed, declared the doctor to be wonderfully tender and indulgent to his little patients: but those creatures, with their round staring eyes, the calm remarks they made upon their father’s slovenly indolence and their mother’s imbecility⁠—their precocious sharp-sightedness and insubordination, moved <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider with a sharp prevailing inclination, intensifying by times almost into action, to whip them all round, and banish the intolerable brats out of sight. Such was his unpaternal way of contemplating the rising hopes of his house. How Nettie could bear it all, was an unceasing marvel to the doctor. Yet, in spite of these disagreeables, he went to <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s all the same.</p>
			<p>One of these winter evenings the doctor wended his way to <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s Cottage in a worse frame of mind than usual. It was a clear frosty night, very pleasant to be out in, though sharp and chill; such a night as brightens young eyes, and exhilarates young hearts, when all is well with them. Young Rider could hear his own footsteps echoing along the hard frost-bound road, and could not but wonder in himself, as he drew near the group of buildings which broke the solitude of the way, whether Nettie too might hear it, and <em>perhaps</em> recognise the familiar step. The shadow of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s fell cold over him as he passed. Just from that spot the light in the parlour window of the cottage became perceptible to the wayfarer. A shadow crossed the blind as he came in sight⁠—Nettie unquestionably. It occurred to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider to remember with very sharp distinctness at that moment, how Nettie’s little shadow had dropped across the sunshine that first morning when he saw her in his own room. He quickened his step unawares⁠—perhaps tonight Nettie might be more accessible than usual, less shut in and surrounded by her family. He pictured to himself, as he went past the willows, which rustled faintly with their long bare branches in the night air, that perhaps, as he was later than usual, Fred might have retired to his den upstairs; and Susan might have gone to bear Fred company⁠—who knows? and the children might be in bed, the dreadful little imps. And for once a half-hour’s talk with the strange little head of the house might comfort the young doctor’s fatigued mind and troubled heart.</p>
			<p>For he was sadly fatigued and worn out. What with incessant occupation and distracted thoughts, this year had been a very exhausting one for the doctor. He had fagged on through the whole summer and autumn without any relaxation. He had chafed over Fred’s presence for half of the year, and had been occupied for the other half with matters still more absorbing and exciting. Even now his mind was in a perpetual ferment, and no comforting spirit spoke quietness to his soul⁠—no stout heart strengthened his⁠—no lively intelligence animated his own to worthy doings. He was very cross and fretful, and knew himself to be so that particular evening⁠—worried and in want of rest. What a chance, if perhaps he found Nettie, whose very provocations were somehow more interesting than other people’s most agreeable and tranquillising efforts, all alone and at leisure! He went on with some palpitations of hope. As soon as he had entered the cottage, however, he found out the delusion he was under. The children were the first fact that presented itself to his senses; an uproar that pervaded the house, a novel tumult waking all the echoes; glimpses of flying figures pursuing each other with brushes and mops, and other impromptu weapons; one astride upon the banisters of the stairs, sliding down from top to bottom; another clinging now and then, in the pauses of the conflict, to the top of one of the doors, by which it swung back and forward. Terrible infants! there they all were in a complete saturnalia, the door of the parlour half open all the time, and no sound of Nettie’s restraining voice. Only poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith standing helpless in successions of fright and exasperation, sometimes alarmed for life and limb, sometimes ready to give the little wretches over to all the penalties of poetic justice. The poor woman brightened a little when she perceived the sympathetic horror on the doctor’s face.</p>
			<p>“How’s this?” exclaimed young Rider, with a sigh of dismay. Alas! however it was, no quiet imaginary conference, no soothing glimpse of Nettie, was practicable tonight. He grew sulky and ferocious under the thought. He seized the imp that hung on the door, and set it down summarily with a certain moral violence, unable to refrain from an admonitory shake, which startled its sudden scream into a quavering echo of alarm. “Do you want to break your neck, sir?” cried the wrathful uncle. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider, however, had to spring aside almost before the words were uttered to escape the encounter of a hearth-brush levelled at him by his sweet little niece. “How is this, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith?” cried the startled visitor, with indignation, raising his voice sufficiently to be quite audible through the half-open door.</p>
			<p>“Bless you, sir, Miss is gone out to tea⁠—don’t say nothing⁠—I don’t begrudge the poor young lady a bit of a holiday,” whispered the frightened landlady under her breath; “but I can’t never give in to it again. Their mamma never takes a bit of notice exceptin’ when they’re found fault with. Lord! to think how blind some folks is when it’s their own. But the poor dear young lady, she’s gone out for a little pleasure⁠—only to Miss Wodehouse’s, doctor,” added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith, looking up with a sudden start to catch the stormy expression on the doctor’s face.</p>
			<p>He made no reply to the troubled landlady. He pushed the children aside, and made a stride into the parlour. To be sure, if Nettie was not here, what a charming opportunity to make himself disagreeable, and give the other two a piece of his mind! Edward Rider was anything but perfect. He decided on that expedient with an angry satisfaction. Since he could not have Nettie, he would at least have this relief to his feelings, which was next best.</p>
			<p>The room was full of smoke, which came in heavy puffs from Fred’s pipe. He himself lay stretched on the little sofa; Nettie’s sofa⁠—Nettie’s room⁠—the place sacred in the doctor’s heart to that bright little figure, the one redeeming presence in this dismal household. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred sat dawdling opposite her husband over some wretched fancywork. Eyes less prejudiced than those of Edward Rider might have imagined this a scene of coarse but not unpleasant domestic comfort. To him it was a disgusting picture of self-indulgence and selfish miserable enjoyment, almost vice. The very tobacco which polluted the atmosphere of her room was bought with Nettie’s money. Pah! the doctor came in with a silent pale concentration of fury and disgust, scarcely able to compel himself to utter ordinary words of civility. His presence disturbed the pair in their stolen pleasure. Fred involuntarily put aside his pipe, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred made a little movement to remove from the table the glass from which her husband had been drinking; but both recollected themselves after a moment. The wife set down the glass with a little spiteful toss of her head; the husband, with that heated sullen flush upon his face, relighted his half-extinguished pipe, and put up again on the sofa the slovenly-slippered feet which at Edward’s first appearance he had withdrawn from it. A sullen “How d’ye do?” was all the salutation that passed between them. <em>They</em> felt themselves found out; the visitor felt with rage and indignation that he had found them out. Defiant shame and resentment, spiteful passion and folly, on one side, encountered the gaze of a spectator outside whose opinion could not be mistaken, a known critic and possible spy. Little comfort could come from this strange reunion. They sat in uneasy silence for a few minutes, mutually ready to fly at each other. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred, in her double capacity as a woman and a fool, was naturally the first to speak.</p>
			<p>“Nettie’s gone out to tea,” said that good wife. “I daresay, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward, we should not have had the pleasure of seeing you here had you known that only Fred and I were at home. It is very seldom we have an evening to ourselves. It was too great a pleasure, I suppose, not to be disturbed.”</p>
			<p>“Susan, hold your confounded tongue,” said the ungrateful Fred.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry to disturb <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Rider,” said Edward, with deadly civility. “I was not aware, indeed, of the domestic enjoyment I was likely to interrupt. But if you don’t want your boys to break their necks, someone ought certainly to interfere outside there.”</p>
			<p>“That is exactly what I expected,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred. “My poor children can’t have a little amusement, poor things, but somebody must interfere with it; and my poor Fred⁠—perhaps you have some fault to find with him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward? Oh, I can see it in your looks! so please take your advantage, now that there’s nobody to be afraid of. I can tell you have ever so many pleasant things just on your lips to say.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you’d mind your own business, Susan,” said her husband, who was not a fool. “Look after these imps there, and let me and Edward alone. Nettie’s gone out, you understand. She’s a wonderful creature, to be sure, but it’s a blessed relief to get rid of her for a little. A man can’t breathe under her sharp eyes,” said Fred, half apologetic, half defiant, as he breathed out a puff of smoke.</p>
			<p>Edward Rider stared at his brother, speechless with rage and indignation. He could have rushed upon that listless figure, and startled the life half out of the nerveless slovenly frame. The state of mingled resentment, disappointment, and disgust he was in, made every particular of this aggravating scene tell more emphatically. To see that heavy vapour obscuring those walls which breathed of Nettie⁠—to think of this one little centre of her life, which always hitherto had borne in some degree the impress of her womanly image, so polluted and vulgarised, overpowered the young man’s patience. Yet perhaps he of all men in the world had least right to interfere.</p>
			<p>“How is it possible,” burst forth the doctor all at once, “that you can live upon that creature, Fred? If you have the heart of a mouse in that big body of yours⁠—if you are not altogether lost and degraded, how can you do it? And, by Jove, when all is done, to go and fill the only room she has⁠—the only place you have left her⁠—with this disgusting smoke and noise as soon as her back is turned! Good heaven! it sickens one to think of it. A fellow like you, as strong as any hodman, to let such a creature sacrifice herself to keep him in bread; and the only bit of a little place she can sit down in when she comes home⁠—It’s too much, you know⁠—it’s more than she ought to bear.”</p>
			<p>“And who are you, to meddle with us and our arrangements?” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred. “My husband is in his own house. You would not take us into your house, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Edward⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hold your confounded tongue, I tell you,” said Fred, slowly gathering himself off the sofa. “You’re a pretty fellow to speak, you are⁠—that wouldn’t lend a fellow a shilling to keep him from ruin. You had better remember where you are⁠—in⁠—in⁠—as Susan says⁠—my own house.”</p>
			<p>What outbreak of contempt might have come from the doctor’s lips was fortunately lost at that moment, since a louder outcry than usual from outside, the screams of the children, and the wailings of the landlady, at length roused the mother to the length of going to the door. When she was gone the two brothers eyed each other threateningly. Fred, not without a certain intolerable sensation of shame, rose to knock his pipe upon the mantel-shelf among Nettie’s pretty girlish ornaments. Somehow these aggravations of insult to her image drove Edward Rider desperate. He laid his hand on Fred’s shoulder and shook him violently.</p>
			<p>“Wake up! can’t you wake up and see what you’re about?” cried the doctor; “can’t you show a little respect for her, at least? Look here, Fred Rider. I knew you could do anything shabby or mean, if it suited you. I knew you would consent to hang a burden on anybody that would take such a weight upon them; but, by Jove, I did not think you had the heart to insult her, after all. A man can’t stand by and see that. Clear off your pipe and your brandy before she comes, or, as sure as I am made of flesh and blood, and not cast-iron⁠—”</p>
			<p>The doctor’s threats were interrupted by the entrance of a woeful procession. Into the presence of the two brothers, eyeing each other with such lowering faces, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith and her husband entered, carrying between them, with solemn looks, the unconscious Freddy, while his mother followed screaming, and his little brother and sister staring open-mouthed. It was some relief to the doctor’s feelings, in the excitement of the moment, to rush to the window and throw it open, admitting a gust of chill December air, penetrating enough to search to the bones of the fireside loiterer. Fred was father enough to turn with anxiety to the child. But his trembling nervous fingers and bemused eyes could make nothing of the “case” thus so suddenly brought before him. He turned fiercely and vacantly upon his wife and demanded why everything was suffered to go to ruin when Nettie was away. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fred, screaming and terrified, began to recriminate. The pallid figure of the child on the table gave a certain air of squalid tragedy to the scene, to the sordid miseries of which the night air, coming in with a rush, chilling the group in their indoor dresses, and flickering the flame of the candles, added one other point of dismal accumulation. The child had dropped from his swing on the door, and was stunned with the fall. Both father and mother thought him dead in the excitement of the moment; but the accustomed and cooler eyes of the doctor perceived the true state of affairs. Edward Rider forgot his disgust and rage as he devoted himself to the little patient⁠—not that he loved the child more, but that the habits of his profession were strong upon him. When he had succeeded in restoring the little fellow to consciousness, the doctor threw a professional glance of inquiry round him to see who could be trusted. Then, with a contemptuous shrug of his shoulders and impatient exclamation, turned back to the table. Fred, shivering and helpless, stood by the fire, uttering confused directions, and rubbing miserably his own flabby hands; his wife, crying, scolding, and incapable, stood at the end of the table, offering no assistance, but wondering when ever Nettie would come back. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider took the patient in his arms, and, beckoning <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith to go before him, carried the child upstairs. There the good mistress of the cottage listened to all his directions, and promised devoutly to obey him⁠—to keep the room quiet, if she could⁠—to tell everything he had said to Miss Nettie. He did not enter the desecrated parlour again when he came downstairs. What was the use? He was glad to go out and escape the chance of a fraternal struggle. He went out into the cold night air all thrilling with excitement and agitation. It was not wonderful that a scene so strange should rouse many impatient thoughts in the young man’s mind; but the most intolerable of these had the most trifling origin. That Fred should have smoked his pipe in Nettie’s sitting-room, when she was out of the way, was not, after all, considering Fred’s character, a very wonderful circumstance, but it exasperated his brother to a greater extent than much more important matters. That aggravation entirely overpowered Edward Rider’s self-control. It seemed the culmination of all the wrong and silent insolent injury inflicted upon Nettie. He saw the stain of those ashes on the little mantel-shelf, the rolling cloud of smoke in the room, and indignation burned yet higher and higher in his breast.</p>
			<p>When the current of his thoughts was suddenly checked and stimulated by the sound of voices on the road. Voices, one of which was Nettie’s, one the lofty clerical accents of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Frank Wentworth. The two were walking arm-in-arm in very confidential colloquy, as the startled and jealous doctor imagined. What were these two figures doing together upon the road? why did Nettie lean on the arm of that handsome young clerical coxcomb? It did not occur to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider that the night was extremely dark, and that Nettie had been at Miss Wodehouse’s, where the curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s was a perpetual visitor. With a mortified and jealous pang, totally unreasonable and totally irresistible, Edward Rider, only a moment before so fantastically extreme in Nettie’s defence⁠—in the defence of Nettie’s very “image” from all vulgar contact and desecration⁠—strode past Nettie now without word or sign of recognition. She did not see him, as he observed with a throbbing heart; she was talking to young <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth with all the haste and eagerness which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider had found so captivating. She never suspected who it was that brushed past her with breathless, exasperated impatience in the darkness. They went on past him, talking, laughing lightly, under the veil of night, quite indifferent as to who heard them, though the doctor did not think of that. He, unreasonably affronted, galled, and mortified, turned his back upon that house, which at this present disappointed moment did not contain one single thing or person which he could dwell on with pleasure; and, a hundred times more discontented, fatigued, and worn out⁠—full of disgust with things in general, and himself and his own fate in particular⁠—than he had been when he set out from the other end of Carlingford, went sulkily, and at a terrific pace, past the long garden-walls of Grange Lane, and all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks’s genteel patients. When he had reached home, he found a message waiting him from an urgent invalid whose “case” kept the unhappy doctor up and busy for half the night. Such was the manner in which Edward Rider got through the evening⁠—the one wonderful exceptional evening when Nettie went out to tea.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
