<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>Next day <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider audibly congratulated himself at breakfast upon having once more his house to himself⁠—audibly, as if it were really necessary to give utterance to the thought before he could quite feel its force. A week before, if Fred had departed, however summarily, there can be no doubt that his brother’s feelings of relief and comfort would have been unfeigned; now, however, he began to think the matter over, and to justify to himself his extraordinary sense of disappointment. As he poured out his own coffee with a sober face, his eye rested upon that easy-chair which had been brought into such prominence in the history of the last two days. He kept looking at it as he sipped that gloomy coffee. Fred had faded from the great chair; his big image threw no shadow upon it. There sat a little fairy queen, tiny as Titania, but dark as an elf of the East, putting up those two shapely tiny hands, brown and beautiful, to push aside the flood of hair, which certainly would have veiled her little figure all over, the doctor thought, had it been let down. Wonderful little sprite! She, no doubt, had dragged her plaintive sister over the seas⁠—she it was that had forced her way into Edward Rider’s house; taken her position in it, ousted the doctor; and she doubtless it was who swept the husband and wife out of it again, leaving no trace behind. Waking up from a little trance of musing upon this too interesting subject, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider suddenly raised himself into an erect position, body and mind, with an involuntary movement, as if to shake off the yoke of the enchantress. He reminded himself instinctively of his brother’s falsehood and ingratitude. After throwing himself a most distasteful burden on Edward’s charity for five long dreary months, the bugbear of the doctor’s dreams, and heavy ever-recurring climax of his uncomfortable thoughts, here had Fred departed without a word of explanation or thanks, or even without saying goodbye. The doctor thought himself quite justified in being angry. He began to feel that the suspicious uneasiness which possessed him was equally natural and inevitable. Such a thankless, heartless departure was enough to put any man out. To imagine that Fred could be capable of it, naturally went to his brother’s heart.</p>
			<p>That day there was still no word of the party who had disappeared so mysteriously out of the doctor’s house. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider went to his hard day’s work vaguely expectant, feeling sure he must hear of them somehow, and more interested in hearing of them than was to be expected from his former low ebb of fraternal affection. When he returned and found still no letter, no message, the blank disappointment of the former night closed still more blankly upon him. When one is all by one’s self, and has nothing at best but an easy-chair to go home to, and goes home expecting a letter, or a message, or a visitor who has not arrived, and has no chance of arriving, the revulsion of feeling is not agreeable. It did not improve the doctor’s temper in the first place. The chill loneliness of that trim room, with its drawn curtains and tidy pretence of being comfortable, exasperated him beyond bearing. He felt shut up in it, and yet would not leave it. Somebody certainly might come even tonight. Fred himself perhaps, if he could escape from the rigid guardianship he was under; or was that miraculous Australian Nettie a little witch, who had spirited the whole party in a nutshell over the seas? Never was man delivered from a burden with a worse grace than was <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider; and the matter had not mended in these twenty-four hours.</p>
			<p>Next morning, however, this fever of fraternal suspense was assuaged. A three-cornered note, addressed in an odd feminine hand, very thin, small, and rapid, came among <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s letters. He signalled it out by instinct, and opened it with an impatience wonderful to behold.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir</span>⁠—We are all at the Blue Boar until we can get lodgings, which I hope to be today. I am utterly ashamed of Fred for not having let you know, and indeed of myself for trusting to him. I should not wonder but we may have been under a mistake about him and you. If you could call about one, I should most likely be in to see you, and perhaps you could give me your advice about the lodgings. Neither of <em>them</em> have the least judgment in such matters. I am sorry to trouble you; but being a stranger, perhaps you will excuse me. I understand you are only at home in the evening, and that is just the time I can’t come out, as I have the whole of them to look to, which is the reason I ask you to call on me. Begging you will pardon me, I remain,</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“Nettie Underwood.”</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“She remains Nettie Underwood,” said the doctor, unawares. He laughed to himself at that conclusion. Then an odd gleam came across his face. It was probably the first time he had laughed in a natural fashion for some months back, and the unusual exertion made his cheeks tingle. His temper was improved that morning. He went off to his patients almost in a good humour. When he passed the great house where Bessie Christian now reigned, he recalled her image with a positive effort. Astonishing what an effect of distance had floated over the apparition of that bride. Was it a year since he saw her and gnashed his teeth at the thought of his own folly, or was it only last Sunday? The doctor could not tell. He put Nettie’s note in his pocketbook, and was at the hotel door punctually at one o’clock. It was in the principal street of Carlingford, George Street, where all the best shops, and indeed some of the best houses, were. From the corner window of the hotel you could see down into the bowery seclusion of Grange Lane, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s famous apple-trees holding tempting clusters over the high wall. The prospect was very different from that which extended before <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s window. Instinctively he marvelled within himself whether, if <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks were to die⁠—people cannot live forever even in Carlingford⁠—whether it might not be a disadvantage to a man to live so far out of the world. No doubt it was a temptation of the Evil One. Happily the young man did not take sufficient time to answer himself, but walked forward briskly through the mazy old passages of the old inn, to a room from which sundry noises issued. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider walked in with the natural confidence of a man who has an appointment. The room was in undisturbed possession of three children⁠—three children making noise enough for six⁠—all very small, very precocious, with staring round eyes and the most complete independence of speech and manners. The doctor confronted the little rabble thunderstruck; they were his brother’s children, unrecognisable little savages as they were. One little fellow, in a linen pinafore, was mounted on the arm of a sofa, spurring vigorously; another was pursuing his sister about the room, trying to catch her feet with the tongs, and filling the air with repeated loud snaps of disappointment. They intermitted their occupations to stare at him. “Look here⁠—here’s a man,” said the youngest, meditatively, beholding his dismayed uncle with a philosophic eye. “Can’t someone go and tell Nettie?” said the little girl, gazing also with calm equanimity. “If he wants Nettie he’ll have to wait,” said the elder boy. A pause followed; the unhappy doctor stood transfixed by the steady stare of their three pair of eyes. Suddenly the little girl burst out of the room, and ran screaming along the passage. “Mamma, mamma, here’s a man come,” cried the wonderful colonial child. A few minutes afterwards their mother appeared, languid and faded as before. Perhaps she had been even prettier than Nettie in her bright days, if any days had ever been bright for Fred Rider’s wife. She was fairer, larger, smoother than her sister; but these advantages had lapsed in a general fade, which transformed her colour into washy pinkness, made her figure stoop, and her footsteps drag. She came remonstrating all the way in feeble accents. It was not for her, certainly, that the doctor had taken the trouble to come to the Blue Boar.</p>
			<p>“Please to sit down,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, and stood leaning on the table, looking at her brother-in-law with a calm curiosity, not unlike that of her children. “Nettie and my husband have gone out together; but now that we are all so happy and united,” she continued, with a sort of feeble spitefulness, “I am sure it is quite a pity to trouble you. You could not take us in, you know. You said that very plain, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward.”</p>
			<p>“It was perfectly true, madam,” said the doctor. “I have not ventured on the step my brother has taken, and have naturally no accommodation for a family. But I am not here for my own pleasure. Your sister, I presume it is, wrote to me. I was requested to call here today.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes; Nettie is very self-willed⁠—very; though, of course, we could not get on without her. She attacked Fred like a wildcat for not writing you: but I daresay, if the truth were known, you did not expect to hear from my husband,” said the wife, recovering her voice, and fixing a vindictive gaze upon her visitor, who felt himself betrayed.</p>
			<p>“I came by Miss Underwood’s instructions and at her request,” said the unfortunate man. “We need not enter into any question between Fred and myself.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, yes, that is very safe and wise for you,” laughed Fred’s wife.</p>
			<p>The doctor was deeply exasperated, as was only natural: he eyed the feeble helpless creature for a moment angrily, provoked to answer her; but his gaze became one of wonder and dismay ere he withdrew it. Surely of all incomprehensible entities, the most amazing is a fool⁠—a creature insensate, unreasoning, whom neither argument nor fact can make any impression upon. Appalled and impressed, the doctor’s gaze left that pretty faded face to turn upon the children. Dreadful imps! If Fred had only taken to evil ways after he became possessed of such a family, his brother could have forgiven him. While these thoughts passed through <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s mind, however, deliverance approached. He heard Nettie’s voice in the passage, long before she reached the door. Not that it was loud like the voices of this dreadful household; but the tone was sufficiently peculiar to be recognised anywhere. With a most penetrating clearness, it came through the long passages, words inaudible, only the sound of a voice, rapid, breathless, decided⁠—with the distant sound of Fred’s long, shambling, uncertain footsteps coming in as the strange accompaniment. Then they entered the room⁠—the one tiny, bright, dauntless, an intrepid, undiscourageable little soul; the other with his heavy large limbs, his bemused face, his air of hopeless failure, idleness, content. Edward Rider gazed involuntarily from one to another of this two. He saw the sprite place herself between the husband and wife, a vain little Quixote, balancing these extremes of helplessness and ruin. He could not help looking at her with a certain unconscious admiration and amazement, as he might have looked at a forlorn hope. Thousands of miles away from her friends, wherever and whatever they might be, with Fred and his wife and children on her hands, a household of incapables⁠—what was that little creature to do?</p>
			<p>“Good morning, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward,” said Nettie. “I thought I should have been back sooner; but Fred is so slow, I cannot manage to get him along at all. We have found some lodgings a little way out of Carlingford, near that chapel, you know, or church, or something, that stands a little off the road: where it’s open, and there’s morning service, and such a handsome young clergyman. Who is he? We went into the chapel, and it’s so fine, you would not believe it. Well, just a hundred yards from there is the house. Four rooms, exactly what I wanted, with a garden for the children to play in⁠—quite quiet, and fresh and pleasant. Tell me who the people are⁠—their name is Smith. If they’re respectable, I’ll go back and take it. I can afford the rent.”</p>
			<p>“Near <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s? They belong to the church there. I daresay they are all right,” said the doctor, “but it is a long way off, and inconvenient, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is just why I want it,” said Nettie. “We never were used to conveniences, and none of us want to be much in the town, so far as I know. It is the very thing. Why has not lunch come up?⁠—what do these people mean, Susan, by not attending to their orders? Ring the bell, Freddy⁠—ring loud; and after lunch, as your drag is at the door, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward, you’ll drive me down to this place again, that I may secure it, won’t you? I want to have a talk with you besides.⁠—Lunch, please, immediately. I ordered it to be ready at one⁠—now it is half-past. We can’t have our time wasted this way.⁠—<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward, please, you’ll stay.”</p>
			<p>The doctor gazed with ever-increasing amazement at the little speaker. Nobody else had spoken a word. Fred had nodded to him sullenly. Fred’s wife had sunk back on the sofa⁠—everybody seemed to recognise Nettie as supreme. He hesitated, it must be confessed, to put his grievances so entirely aside as to sit down in perfect amity with Fred and his household; but to refuse to drive Nettie to <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s was impossible. The blood rushed to the doctor’s face at the thought. What the world of Carlingford would say to see his well-known vehicle proceeding down Grange Lane, through <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks’s territories, under such circumstances, was a question he did not choose to consider; neither did he enter too minutely into the special moment at which his next patient might be expecting him. The young man was under the spell, and did not struggle against it. He yielded to the invitation, which was a command. He drew near the table at which Nettie, without hesitation, took the presiding place. A dull amount of conversation, often interrupted by that lively little woman, rose in the uncongenial party. Nettie cut up the meat for those staring imps of children⁠—did them all up in snowy napkins⁠—kept them silent and in order. She regulated what Susan was to have, and which things were best for Fred. She appealed to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward perpetually, taking him into her confidence in a way which could not fail to be flattering to that young man, and actually reduced to the calmness of an ordinary friendly party this circle so full of smouldering elements of commotion. Through all she was so dainty, so pretty, her rapid fingers so shapely, her eager talk so sweet-toned, that it was beyond the power of mortal man to remain uninterested. It was a development of womankind unknown to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider. Bessie Christian had exhausted the race for him until now; but Nettie was a thousand times more piquant than Bessie Christian. He gazed and wondered, and moralised secretly in his own mind, what was to become of the girl?⁠—what could she do?</p>
			<p>“You have left some of your things at my house, Fred,” said the doctor, making an attempt to approach his sullen brother, who evidently expected no overtures of friendship.</p>
			<p>“Yes. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rider, you see, arrived unexpectedly,” said Fred, with confusion⁠—“in fact, I knew nothing about it, or⁠—or I should have told you⁠—Nettie⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nettie thought it best to come off at once, without writing,” explained Fred’s wife.</p>
			<p>“What was the use of writing?” cried that little person. “You had written to Fred for six months without ever getting an answer. You made everybody unhappy round you with your fears and troubles about him. I knew perfectly he was quite well and enjoying himself; but, of course, Susan would not be convinced. So what was there for it but bringing her away? What else could I do, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward? And to leave the children would have been preposterous. In the first place, I should have been miserable about them; and so, as soon as she found Fred was all right, would Susan: and something would certainly have happened⁠—scarlet fever or something⁠—and at the end of all I should have had to go out again to fetch them. So the shortest way was to bring them at once. Don’t you think so? And to see us all here so comfortable, I am sure is enough to repay anyone for the trouble. Fred, don’t drink any more beer.”</p>
			<p>Nettie put out her tiny hand as she spoke to arrest the bottle. Fred stared at her with a dull red flush on his face; but he gave in, in the most inexplicable way; it seemed a matter of course to yield to Nettie. The doctor’s amazement began to be mingled with amusement. To see how she managed them all was worth the sacrifice of a little time⁠—unconsciously he became more fraternal in his thoughts. He spoke to foolish faded <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred with a total forgiveness and forgetfulness of her spiteful speech. He hoped she would like Carlingford; he said something to the children. But it was not easy to talk in presence of that amazing family party, the existence of which he had not dreamed of a few days ago. To see his brother at the head of such a group had, in spite of himself, a wonderful effect upon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider. Their children, of course, must be supported somehow. Who was to do it? Was their father, grown incapable and useless in the middle of his days, to be forced into the current of life again? Was it a vague faith in Providence which had brought the helpless household here; or was it a more distinct, if not so elevated, confidence in Nettie? The doctor’s heart sank once more within him as he looked round the table. Three helpless by nature⁠—two equally helpless who ought in nature to have been the support of the whole⁠—nothing but one bright ready little spirit between them all and destitution; and what could Nettie do to stave that wolf from the door? Once more <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s countenance fell. If the household broke down in its attempt at independence, who had they to turn to but himself?⁠—such a prospect was not comfortable. When a man works himself to death for his own family, he takes the pleasure with the pain; but when another’s family threatens to fall upon his hands, the prospect is naturally appalling⁠—and even if Fred could do anything, what was Fred’s life, undermined by evil habit, to depend upon? Silence once more fell over the little company⁠—silence from all but Nettie and the children, who referred to her naturally instead of to their mother. Fred was sullen, and his wife took her cue from him. Edward was uneasy and dismayed. Family parties suddenly assembled without due warning are seldom greatly successful; and even Nettie could not make immediate reconciliation and fraternal kindness out of this.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
