<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
			<p>It was not long before the doctor was made aware of the ghost in his troubled path. Nobody in Carlingford could meet the big Bushman in those streets, which always looked too narrow for him, without a certain curiosity about that salvage man. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider had observed him with jealous interest on his very first appearance, but had hitherto connected no idea but that of a return to Australia, which he felt sure Nettie would never consent to, with the big stranger. With such a thought he had seen him making his way towards the cottage that very evening when he himself turned back, as long as those crimsoned windows were visible, to look for Nettie, who did not show herself. The doctor was bound to see a distant patient, miles on the other side of Carlingford. As he dashed along over the echoing road he had time to imagine to himself how Nettie might at that very moment be badgered and persecuted; and when he had seen his patient and done his duty, and with the lamps lighted in the drag, and the frosty wind blowing keen on his face, and the lights of Carlingford cheering him on in the distance, was once more returning, an impatience, somewhat akin to Nettie’s, suddenly came upon the doctor. Akin, yet different; for in his case it was an impulse of sensation, an inspiration of the exhilarating speed and energy of motion with which he flew through the bracing air, master of himself, his horse, and the long sweep of solitary road before him. Again it occurred to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider to dash forward to <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s and carry off Nettie, oppose it who would. The idea pleased him as he swept along in the darkness, its very impossibility making the vision sweeter. To carry her off at a stroke, in glorious defiance of circumstances, and win happiness and love, whatever might ensue. In the flush of the moment the doctor suddenly asked himself whether this, after all, were not the wisest course? whether, whatever might come of it, happiness was not worth the encounter of the dark array of troubles behind? and whether to precipitate everything by a sudden conclusion might not be the best way of solving all the intricacies of the matter? He was still in this mood when he arrived at his own house, where dinner, as usual, was not improved by having been ready for an hour. The lamp was not lighted when he came in, and only the cold reflection of the street lights outside, with a particoloured gleam at the corner window from his own red and blue professional ensign at the surgery door, lighted the solitary little room, where he looked in vain even for so much as a note or letter to bring some shadow of human fellowship to his home; the fire smouldering dully, the big chair turned with a sullen back against the wall, as if nobody ever sat there⁠—though Nettie had once and forever appropriated it to her use⁠—everything in such inhuman trim and good order disgusted the doctor. He rang his bell violently for the lights and refreshments which were so slow of coming, and, throwing himself into that chair, bit his nails and stared out at the lamplight in the rapid access of thought that came upon him. The first thing that disturbed him in this was the apparition of a figure outside peering in with some anxiety at the blank windows⁠—somebody who was evidently curious to know whether the doctor had yet come home. The unhappy doctor started, and rang his bell once more with furious iteration. He knew what was coming. Somebody else, no doubt, had taken ill, without any consideration for young Rider’s dinner, which, however, a man must manage to swallow even when tormented with importunate patients, and in love. But the knock of the untimely visitor sounded at the much-assailed door before Mary, sulky and resistant, had been able to arrange before the hungry doctor the half-warm half-cold viands which his impatience would not permit to be duly “heated up;” and he had just seated himself to dispose of the unsatisfactory meal when the little groom, who was as tired as his master, opened the door for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith from <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith was a familiar periodical visitor at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s. She had not ceased to hold to that hasty and unwise financial arrangement into which the doctor was persuaded to enter when Fred’s pipe had exasperated the landlady into rebellion. He had supplemented the rent at that exciting moment rather than have Nettie disturbed; and now that poor Fred’s pipe was extinguished forever, the doctor still paid the imposition demanded from him⁠—half because he had no time to contest it, half because it was, however improper and unnecessary, a kind of pleasure to do something for Nettie, little as she knew and deeply as she would have resented it. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s brows cleared up at sight of Nettie’s landlady. He expected some little private anecdotes of her and her ways, such as no one else could give him. He gave <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith a chair with a benignity to which she had no personal claim. Her arrival made <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider’s beefsteak palatable, though the cookery and condition of the same were, to say the least, far from perfect. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith evidently was a little embarrassed with the gracious reception she received. She twisted the corner of her shawl in her fingers as if it had been that apron with which women of her class habitually relieve their feelings. She was in a false position. She came with the worst of news to the melancholy lover, and he treated her as if she brought some special message or favour from the lady of his thoughts.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, and how are you all at the cottage?” said the doctor, applying himself leisurely to his beefsteak.</p>
			<p>“Well, doctor, nothing to brag of,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, fixing her eyes upon the fringe of her shawl. “I haven’t nothing to say that’s pleasant, more the pity. I don’ know, sir, how you’ll take it when you come to hear; but it’s come very hard upon me. Not for the sake of the lodgings, as’ll let again fast enough, now the poor gentleman’s sad fate is partly forgotten; but you know, doctor, a body gets attached-like when one set of people stays long enough to feel at home; and there ain’t many young ladies like Miss if you were to search the country through. But, now she’s really give in to it herself, there ain’t no more to be said. I never could bring myself to think Miss would give in till tonight when she told me; though Smith he always said, when the stranger gentleman took to coming so constant, as he knew how it would be.”</p>
			<p>“For heaven’s sake, what do you mean?” cried <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider, pushing away his plate, and rising hurriedly from that dinner which was fated never to be eaten. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith shook her head and drew out her handkerchief.</p>
			<p>“I know nothing more, doctor, but just they’re going off to Australia,” said the landlady, mournfully; “and Miss has started packing the big boxes as have been in the hattic since ever they come: they’re going off back where they come from⁠—that’s all as I know.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible!” cried the doctor.</p>
			<p>“I’d have said so myself this morning,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith; “but there ain’t nothing impossible, doctor, as Miss takes in her head. Don’t you go and rush out after her, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider. I beg of you upon my knees, if it was my last word! I said to Smith I’d come up and tell the doctor, that he mightn’t hear from nobody promiscuous as couldn’t explain, and mightn’t come rushing down to the cottage to know the rights of it and find the gentleman there unexpected. If there’s one thing I’m afeard of, it’s a quarrel between gentlemen in my house. So, doctor, for the love of peace, don’t you go anear the cottage. I’ll tell you everything if you listen to me.”</p>
			<p>The doctor, who had snatched up his hat and made a rapid step towards the door, came back and seized hold of his visitor’s shoulder, all his benignity having been put to flight by her unlooked-for revelation. “Look here! I want the truth, and no gossip! What do you mean⁠—what gentleman? What is it all about?” cried <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider, hoarse with sudden passion.</p>
			<p>“Oh, bless you, doctor, don’t blame it upon me, sir,” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith. “It ain’t neither my fault nor my business, but that you’ve always been kind, and my heart warms to Miss. It’s the gentleman from Australia as has come and come again; and being an unmarried gentleman, and Miss⁠—you know what she is, sir⁠—and I ask you, candid, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider, what was anybody to suppose?”</p>
			<p>The doctor grew wildly red up to his hair. He bit his lips over some furious words which Carlingford would have been horrified to hear, and grasped <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith’s shoulder with a closer pressure. “What did she tell you?” said the doctor. “Let me have it word for word. Did she say she was going away?⁠—did she speak of this⁠—this⁠—fellow?” exclaimed the doctor, with an adjective over which charity drops a tear. “Can’t you tell me without any supposes, what did she say?”</p>
			<p>“I’m not the woman to stand being shook⁠—let me go this minute, sir,” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith. “The Australian gentleman is a very nice-spoken civil man, as was always very respectful to me. She came into my back-parlour, doctor, if you will know so particular⁠—all shining and flashing, like as she does when something’s happened. I don’t make no doubt they had been settling matters, them two, and so I told Smith. ‘<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith,’ said Miss, in her hasty way, enough to catch your breath coming all of a sudden, ‘I can’t stand this no longer⁠—I shall have to go away⁠—it ain’t no good resisting.’ Them were her very words, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider. ‘Get me out the big boxes, please,’ said Miss. ‘It’s best done quietly. You must take your week’s notice, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith, from this day;’ and with that she kept moving about the room all in a flutter like, not able to rest. ‘Do go and get me out those boxes; there’s always a ship on the 24th,’ she says, taking up my knitting and falling to work at it to keep her hands steady. ‘The day afore Christmas!’ says I; ‘and oh, Miss, it’s running in the face of Providence to sail at this time of the year. You’ll have dreadful weather, as sure as life.’ You should have seen her, doctor! She gave a sort of smile up at me, all flashing as if those eyes of her were the sides of a lantern, and the light bursting out both there and all over. ‘All the better,’ she says, as if she’d have liked to fight the very wind and sea, and have her own way even there. Bless you, she’s dreadful for having her own way. A good easy gentleman now, as didn’t mind much⁠—<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider⁠—Doctor!⁠—you’re not a-going, after all I’ve told you? Doctor, doctor, I say⁠—”</p>
			<p>But what <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith said was inaudible to Edward Rider. The door rang in her ears as he dashed it after him, leaving her mistress of the field. There, where he had once left Nettie, he now, all-forgetful of his usual fastidious dislike of gossip, left <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith sole occupant of his most private territories. At this unlooked-for crisis the doctor had neither a word nor a moment to spend on anyone. He rushed out of the house, oblivious of all those professional necessities which limit the comings and goings of a doctor in great practice; he did not even know what he was going to do. Perhaps it was an anxious husband or father whom he all but upset as he came out, with sudden impetuosity, into the unfrequented street; but he did not stop to see. Pale and desperate, he faced the cold wind which rushed up between the blank garden-walls of Grange Lane. At <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s door he stumbled against young Wentworth coming out, and passed him with a muttered exclamation which startled the curate. All the floating momentary jealousies of the past rushed back upon the doctor’s mind as he passed that tall figure in the wintry road: how he had snatched Nettie from the vague kindnesses of the young clergyman⁠—the words he had addressed to her on this very road⁠—the answer she had given him once, which had driven him wild with passion and resentment. Impossible! the Australian, it appeared, had found nothing impossible in those circumstances in which Nettie had intrenched herself. Had the doctor’s wisdom been monstrous folly, and his prudence the blindest shortsightedness? He asked himself the question as he rushed on towards that lighted window shining far along the dark road⁠—the same window which he had seen Nettie’s shadow cross, which had been opened to light poor Fred upon the way he never could tread again. Within that jealous blind, shining in that softened domestic light, what drama, murderous to the doctor’s peace, might be going on now?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
