<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>Matters went on quietly for some time without any catastrophe occurring to the Rector. He had shut himself up from all society, and declined the invitations of the parishioners for ten long days at least; but finding that the kind people were only kinder than ever when they understood he was “indisposed,” poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor resumed his ordinary life, confiding timidly in some extra precautions which his own ingenuity had invented. He was shyer than ever of addressing the ladies in those parties he was obliged to attend. He was especially embarrassed and uncomfortable in the presence of the two Miss Wodehouses, who, unfortunately, were very popular in Carlingford, and whom he could not help meeting everywhere. Notwithstanding this embarrassment, it is curious how well he knew how they looked, and what they were doing, and all about them. Though he could not for his life have told what these things were called, he knew Miss Wodehouse’s dove-coloured dress and her French grey; and all those gleams of blue which set off Lucy’s fair curls, and floated about her pretty person under various pretences, had a distinct though inarticulate place in the good man’s confused remembrance. But neither Lucy nor Miss Wodehouse had brought matters to extremity. He even ventured to go to their house occasionally without any harm coming of it, and lingered in that blooming fragrant garden, where the blossoms had given place to fruit, and ruddy apples hung heavy on the branches which had once scattered their petals, rosy-white, on Frank Wentworth’s Anglican coat. Yet <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor was not lulled into incaution by this seeming calm. Other people besides his mother had intimated to him that there were expectations current of his “settling in life.” He lived not in false security, but wise trembling, never knowing what hour the thunderbolt might fall upon his head.</p>
			<p>It happened one day, while still in this condition of mind, that the Rector was passing through Grove Street on his way home. He was walking on the humbler side of the street, where there is a row of cottages with little gardens in front of them⁠—cheap houses, which are contented to be haughtily overlooked by the staircase windows and blank walls of their richer neighbours on the other side of the road. The Rector thought, but could not be sure, that he had seen two figures like those of the Miss Wodehouses going into one of these houses, and was making a little haste to escape meeting those enemies of his peace. But as he went hastily on, he heard sobs and screams⁠—sounds which a man who hid a good heart under a shy exterior could not willingly pass by. He made a troubled pause before the door from which these outcries proceeded, and while he stood thus irresolute whether to pass on or to stop and inquire the cause, someone came rushing out and took hold of his arm. “Please, sir, she’s dying⁠—oh, please, sir, she thought a deal o’ you. Please, will you come in and speak to her?” cried the little servant-girl who had pounced upon him so. The Rector stared at her in amazement. He had not his prayerbook⁠—he was not prepared; he had no idea of being called upon in such an emergency. In the meantime the commotion rather increased in the house, and he could hear in the distance a voice adjuring someone to go for the clergyman. The Rector stood uncertain and perplexed, perhaps in a more serious personal difficulty than had ever happened to him all his life before. For what did he know about deathbeds? or what had he to say to anyone on that dread verge? He grew pale with real vexation and distress.</p>
			<p>“Have they gone for a doctor? that would be more to the purpose,” he said, unconsciously, aloud.</p>
			<p>“Please, sir, it’s no good,” said the little maidservant. “Please, the doctor’s been, but he’s no good⁠—and she’s unhappy in her mind, though she’s quite resigned to go: and oh, please, if you would say a word to her, it might do her a deal of good.”</p>
			<p>Thus adjured, the Rector had no choice. He went gloomily into the house and up the stair after his little guide. Why did not they send for the minister of Salem Chapel close by? or for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, who was accustomed to that sort of thing? Why did they resort to him in such an emergency? He would have made his appearance before the highest magnates of the land⁠—before the Queen herself⁠—before the bench of bishops or the Privy Council⁠—with less trepidation than he entered that poor little room.</p>
			<p>The sufferer lay breathing heavily in the poor apartment. She did not look very ill to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor’s inexperienced eyes. Her colour was bright, and her face full of eagerness. Near the door stood Miss Wodehouse, looking compassionate but helpless, casting wistful glances at the bed, but standing back in a corner as confused and embarrassed as the Rector himself. Lucy was standing by the pillow of the sick woman with a watchful readiness visible to the most unskilled eye⁠—ready to raise her, to change her position, to attend to her wants almost before they were expressed. The contrast was wonderful. She had thrown off her bonnet and shawl, and appeared, not like a stranger, but somehow in her natural place, despite the sweet youthful beauty of her looks, and the gay girlish dress with its floating ribbons. These singular adjuncts notwithstanding, no homely nurse in a cotton gown could have looked more alert or serviceable, or more natural to the position, than Lucy did. The poor Rector, taking the seat which the little maid placed for him directly in the centre of the room, looked at the nurse and the patient with a gasp of perplexity and embarrassment. A deathbed, alas! was an unknown region to him.</p>
			<p>“Oh, sir, I’m obliged to you for coming⁠—oh, sir, I’m grateful to you,” cried the poor woman in the bed. “I’ve been ill, off and on, for years, but never took thought to it as I ought. I’ve put off and put off, waiting for a better time⁠—and now, God help me, it’s perhaps too late. Oh, sir, tell me, when a person’s ill and dying, is it too late?”</p>
			<p>Before the Rector could even imagine what he could answer, the sick woman took up the broken thread of her own words, and continued⁠—</p>
			<p>“I don’t feel to trust as I ought to⁠—I don’t feel no confidence,” she said, in anxious confession. “Oh, sir, do you think it matters if one feels it?⁠—don’t you think things might be right all the same though we <em>were</em> uneasy in our minds? My thinking can’t change it one way or another. Ask the good gentleman to speak to me, Miss Lucy, dear⁠—he’ll mind what <em>you</em> say.”</p>
			<p>A look from Lucy quickened the Rector’s speech, but increased his embarrassments. “It⁠—it isn’t her doctor she has no confidence in?” he said, eagerly.</p>
			<p>The poor woman gave a little cry. “The doctor⁠—the doctor! what can he do to a poor dying creature? Oh, Lord bless you, it’s none of them things I’m thinking of; it’s my soul⁠—my soul!”</p>
			<p>“But my poor good woman,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, “though it is very good and praiseworthy of you to be anxious about your soul, let us hope that there is no such⁠—no such <em>haste</em> as you seem to suppose.”</p>
			<p>The patient opened her eyes wide, and stared, with the anxious look of disease, in his face.</p>
			<p>“I mean,” said the good man, faltering under that gaze, “that I see no reason for your making yourself so very anxious. Let us hope it is not so bad as that. You are very ill, but not <em>so</em> ill⁠—I suppose.”</p>
			<p>Here the Rector was interrupted by a groan from the patient, and by a troubled, disapproving, disappointed look from Lucy Wodehouse. This brought him to a sudden standstill. He gazed for a moment helplessly at the poor woman in the bed. If he had known anything in the world which would have given her consolation, he was ready to have made any exertion for it; but he knew nothing to say⁠—no medicine for a mind diseased was in his repositories. He was deeply distressed to see the disappointment which followed his words, but his distress only made him more silent, more helpless, more inefficient than before.</p>
			<p>After an interval which was disturbed only by the groans of the patient and the uneasy fidgeting of good Miss Wodehouse in her corner, the Rector again broke silence. The sick woman had turned to the wall, and closed her eyes in dismay and disappointment⁠—evidently she had ceased to expect anything from him.</p>
			<p>“If there is anything I can do,” said poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, “I am afraid I have spoken hastily. I meant to try to calm her mind a little; if I can be of any use?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, maybe I’m hasty,” said the dying woman, turning round again with a sudden effort⁠—“but, oh, to speak to me of having time when I’ve one foot in the grave already!”</p>
			<p>“Not so bad as that⁠—not so bad as that,” said the Rector, soothingly.</p>
			<p>“But I tell you it is as bad as that,” she cried, with the brief blaze of anger common to great weakness. “I’m not a child to be persuaded different from what I know. If you’d tell me⁠—if you’d say a prayer⁠—ah, Miss Lucy, it’s coming on again.”</p>
			<p>In a moment Lucy had raised the poor creature in her arms, and in default of the pillows which were not at hand, had risen herself into their place, and supported the gasping woman against her own breast. It was a paroxysm dreadful to behold, in which every labouring breath seemed the last. The Rector sat like one struck dumb, looking on at that mortal struggle. Miss Wodehouse approached nervously from behind, and went up to the bedside, faltering forth questions as to what she could do. Lucy only waved her hand, as her own light figure swayed and changed, always seeking the easiest attitude for the sufferer. As the elder sister drew back, the Rector and she glanced at each other with wistful mutual looks of sympathy. Both were equally well-disposed, equally helpless and embarrassed. How to be of any use in that dreadful agony of nature was denied to both. They stood looking on, awed and self-reproaching. Such scenes have doubtless happened in sickrooms before now.</p>
			<p>When the fit was over, a hasty step came up the stair, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth entered the room. He explained in a whisper that he had not been at home when the messenger came, but had followed whenever he heard of the message. Seeing the Rector, he hesitated, and drew back with some surprise, and, even (for he was far from perfect) in that chamber, a little flush of offence. The Rector rose abruptly, waving his hand, and went to join Miss Wodehouse in her corner. There the two elderly spectators looked on silent at ministrations of which both were incapable; one watching with wondering yet affectionate envy how Lucy laid down the weakened but relieved patient upon her pillows; and one beholding with a surprise he could not conceal, how a young man, not half his own age, went softly, with all the confidence yet awe of nature, into those mysteries which he dared not touch upon. The two young creatures by the deathbed acknowledged that their patient was dying; the woman stood by her watchful and affectionate⁠—the man held up before her that cross, not of wood or metal, but of truth and everlasting verity, which is the only hope of man. The spectators looked on, and did not interrupt⁠—looked on, awed and wondering⁠—unaware of how it was, but watching, as if it were a miracle wrought before their eyes. Perhaps all the years of his life had not taught the Rector so much as did that half-hour in an unknown poor bedchamber, where, honest and humble, he stood aside, and, kneeling down, responded to his young brother’s prayer. His young brother⁠—young enough to have been his son⁠—not half nor a quarter part so learned as he; but a world further on in that profession which they shared⁠—the art of winning souls.</p>
			<p>When those prayers were over, the Rector, without a word to anybody, stole quietly away. When he got into the street, however, he found himself closely followed by Miss Wodehouse, of whom he was not at this moment afraid. That good creature was crying softly under her veil. She was eager to make up to him, to open out her full heart; and indeed the Rector, like herself, in that wonderful sensation of surprised and unenvying discomfiture, was glad at that moment of sympathy too.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, isn’t it wonderful?” sighed good Miss Wodehouse.</p>
			<p>The Rector did not speak, but he answered by a very emphatic nod of his head.</p>
			<p>“It did not use to be so when you and I were young,” said his companion in failure. “I sometimes take a little comfort from that; but no doubt, if it had been in me, it would have shown itself somehow. Ah, I fear, I fear, I was not well brought up; but, to be sure, that dear child has not been brought up at all, if one may say so. Her poor mother died when she was born. And oh, I’m afraid I never was kind to Lucy’s mother, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor. You know she was only a year or two older than I was; and to think of that child, that baby! What a world she is, and always was, before me, that might have been her mother, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor!” said Miss Wodehouse, with a little sob.</p>
			<p>“But things were different in our young days,” said the Rector, repeating her sentiment, without inquiring whether it were true or not, and finding a certain vague consolation in it.</p>
			<p>“Ah, that is true,” said Miss Wodehouse⁠—“that is true; what a blessing things are so changed; and these blessed young creatures,” she added softly, with tears falling out of her gentle old eyes⁠—“these blessed young creatures are near the Fountainhead.”</p>
			<p>With this speech Miss Wodehouse held out her hand to the Rector, and they parted with a warm mutual grasp. The Rector went straight home⁠—straight to his study, where he shut himself in, and was not to be disturbed; that night was one long to be remembered in the good man’s history. For the first time in his life he set himself to inquire what was his supposed business in this world. His treatise on the Greek verb, and his new edition of Sophocles, were highly creditable to the Fellow of All Souls; but how about the Rector of Carlingford? What was he doing here, among that little world of human creatures who were dying, being born, perishing, suffering, falling into misfortune and anguish, and all manner of human vicissitudes, every day? Young Wentworth knew what to say to that woman in her distress; and so might the Rector, had her distress concerned a disputed translation, or a disused idiom. The good man was startled in his composure and calm. Today he had visibly failed in a duty which even in All Souls was certainly known to be one of the duties of a Christian priest. Was he a Christian priest, or what was he? He was troubled to the very depths of his soul. To hold an office the duties of which he could not perform, was clearly impossible. The only question, and that a hard one, was, whether he could learn to discharge those duties, or whether he must cease to be Rector of Carlingford. He laboured over this problem in his solitude, and could find no answer. “Things were different when we were young,” was the only thought that was any comfort to him, and that was poor consolation.</p>
			<p>For one thing, it is hard upon the most magnanimous of men to confess that he has undertaken an office for which he has not found himself capable. Magnanimity was perhaps too lofty a word to apply to the Rector; but he was honest to the bottom of his soul. As soon as he became aware of what was included in the duties of his office, he must perform them, or quit his post. But how to perform them? Can one <em>learn</em> to convey consolation to the dying, to teach the ignorant, to comfort the sorrowful? Are these matters to be acquired by study, like Greek verbs or intricate measures? The Rector’s heart said No. The Rector’s imagination unfolded before him, in all its halcyon blessedness, that ancient paradise of All Souls, where no such confounding demands ever disturbed his beatitude. The good man groaned within himself over the mortification, the labour, the sorrow, which this living was bringing upon him. “If I had but let it pass to Morgan, who wanted to marry,” he said with self-reproach; and then suddenly bethought himself of his own most innocent filial romance, and the pleasure his mother had taken in her new house and new beginning of life. At that touch the tide flowed back again. Could he dismiss her now to another solitary cottage in Devonshire, her old home there being all dispersed and broken up, while the house she had hoped to die in cast her out from its long-hoped-for shelter? The Rector was quite overwhelmed by this new aggravation. If by any effort of his own, any sacrifice to himself, he could preserve this bright new home to his mother, would he shrink from that labour of love?</p>
			<p>Nobody, however, knew anything about those conflicting thoughts which rent his sober bosom. He preached next Sunday as usual, letting no trace of the distressed, wistful anxiety to do his duty which now possessed him gleam into his sermon. He looked down upon a crowd of unsympathetic, uninterested faces, when he delivered that smooth little sermon, which nobody cared much about, and which disturbed nobody. The only eyes which in the smallest degree comprehended him were those of good Miss Wodehouse, who had been the witness and the participator of his humiliation. Lucy was not there. Doubtless Lucy was at <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s, where the sermons of the perpetual curate differed much from those of the Rector of Carlingford. Ah me! the rectorship, with all its responsibilities, was a serious business; and what was to become of it yet, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor could not see. He was not a hasty man⁠—he determined to wait and see what events might make of it; to consider it ripely⁠—to take full counsel with himself. Every time he came out of his mother’s presence, he came affected and full of anxiety to preserve to her that home which pleased her so much. She was the strong point in favour of Carlingford; and it was no small tribute to the good man’s filial affection, that for her chiefly he kept his neck under the yoke of a service to which he knew himself unequal, and, sighing, turned his back upon his beloved cloisters. If there had been no other sickbeds immediately in Carlingford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Proctor would have won the day.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
