<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>IV</h3>
			<p>Such a blessed exemption, however, was not to be hoped for. When the Rector was solemnly sent for from his very study to visit a poor man who was not expected to live many days, he put his prayer-book under his arm, and went off doggedly, feeling that now was the crisis. He went through it in as exemplary a manner as could have been desired, but it was dreadful work to the Rector. If nobody else suspected him, he suspected himself. He had no spontaneous word of encouragement or consolation to offer; he went through it as his duty with a horrible abstractness. That night he went home disgusted beyond all possible power of self-reconciliation. He could not continue this. Good evangelical <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bury, who went before him, and by nature loved preaching, had accustomed the people to much of such visitations. It was murder to the Fellow of All-Souls.</p>
			<p>That night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor wrote a long letter to his dear cheery old mother, disclosing all his heart to her. It was written with a pathos of which the good man was wholly unconscious, and finished by asking her advice and her prayers. He sent it up to her next morning on her breakfast tray, which he always furnished with his own hands, and went out to occupy himself in paying visits till it should be time to see her, and ascertain her opinion. At <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s there was nobody at home but Lucy, who was very friendly, and took no notice of that sad encounter which had changed his views so entirely. The Rector found, on inquiry, that the woman was dead, but not until <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had administered to her fully the consolations of the church. Lucy did not look superior, or say anything in admiration of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, but the Rector’s conscience supplied all that was wanting. If good Miss Wodehouse had been there with her charitable looks, and her disefficiency so like his own, it would have been a consolation to the good man. He would have turned joyfully from Lucy and her blue ribbons to that distressed dove-coloured woman, so greatly had recent events changed him. But the truth was, he cared nothing for either of them nowadays. He was delivered from those whimsical distressing fears. Something more serious had obliterated those lighter apprehensions. He had no leisure now to think that somebody had planned to marry him; all his thoughts were fixed on matters so much more important that this was entirely forgotten.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor was seated as usual in the place she loved, with her newspapers, her books, her work-basket, and silver-headed cane at the side of her chair. The old lady, like her son, looked serious. She beckoned him to quicken his steps when she saw him appear at the drawing-room door, and pointed to the chair placed beside her, all ready for this solemn conference. He came in with a troubled face, scarcely venturing to look at her, afraid to see the disappointment which he had brought upon his dearest friend. The old lady divined why it was he did not lift his eyes. She took his hand and addressed him with all her characteristic vivacity.</p>
			<p>“Morley, what is this you mean, my dear? When did I ever give my son reason to distrust me? Do you think I would suffer you to continue in a position painful to yourself for my sake? How dare you think such a thing of me, Morley? Don’t say so? you didn’t mean it; I can see it in your eyes.”</p>
			<p>The Rector shook his head, and dropped into the chair placed ready for him. He might have had a great deal to say for himself could she have heard him. But as it was, he could not shout all his reasons and apologies into her deaf ear.</p>
			<p>“As for the change to me,” said the old lady, instinctively seizing upon the heart of the difficulty, “that’s nothing⁠—simply nothing. I’ve not had time to get attached to Carlingford. I’ve no associations with the place. Of course I shall be very glad to go back to all my old friends. Put that out of the question, Morley.”</p>
			<p>But the Rector only shook his head once more. The more she made light of it, the more he perceived all the painful circumstances involved. Could his mother go back to Devonshire and tell all her old ladies that her son had made a failure in Carlingford? He grieved within himself at the thought. His brethren at All-Souls might understand <i>him</i>; but what could console the brave old woman for all the condolence and commiseration to which she would be subject? “It goes to my heart, mother,” he cried in her ear.</p>
			<p>“Well, Morley, I am very sorry you find it so,” said the old lady; “very sorry you can’t see your way to all your duties. They tell me the late rector was very Low Church, and visited about like a Dissenter, so it is not much wonder you, with your different habits, find yourself a good deal put out; but, my dear, don’t you think it’s only at first? Don’t you think after a while the people would get into your ways, and you into theirs? Miss Wodehouse was here this morning, and was telling me a good deal about the late rector. It’s to be expected you should find the difference; but by-and-by, to be sure, you might get used to it, and the people would not expect so much.”</p>
			<p>“Did she tell you where we met the other day?” asked the Rector, with a brevity rendered necessary by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor’s infirmity.</p>
			<p>“She told me⁠—she’s a dear confused good soul,” said the old lady⁠—“about the difference between Lucy and herself, and how the young creature was twenty times handier than she, and something about young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. Really, by all I hear, that must be a very presuming young man,” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor, with a lively air of offence. “His interference among your parishioners, Morley, is really more than I should be inclined to bear.”</p>
			<p>Once more the good Rector shook his head. He had not thought of that aspect of the subject. He was indeed so free from vanity or self-importance, that his only feeling in regard to the sudden appearance of the perpetual curate was respect and surprise. He would not be convinced otherwise even now. “He can do his duty, mother,” he answered, sadly.</p>
			<p>“Stuff and nonsense!” cried the old lady. “Do you mean to tell me a boy like that can do his duty better than my son could do it, if he put his mind to it? And if it is your duty, Morley, dear,” continued his mother, melting a little, and in a coaxing persuasive tone, “of course I know you <i>will</i> do it, however hard it may be.”</p>
			<p>“That’s just the difficulty,” cried the Rector, venturing on a longer speech than usual, and roused to a point at which he had no fear of the listeners in the kitchen; “such duties require other training than mine has been. I can’t!⁠—do you hear me, mother?⁠—I must not hold a false position; that’s impossible.”</p>
			<p>“You shan’t hold a false position,” cried the old lady; “that’s the only thing that <i>is</i> impossible⁠—but, Morley, let us consider, dear. You are a clergyman, you know; you ought to understand all that’s required of you a great deal better than these people do. My dear, your poor father and I trained you up to be a clergyman,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor, rather pathetically, “and not to be a Fellow of All-Souls.”</p>
			<p>The Rector groaned. Had it not been advancement, progress, unhoped-for good fortune, that made him a member of that learned corporation? He shook his head. Nothing could change the fact now. After fifteen years’ experience of that Elysium, he could not put on the cassock and surplice with all his youthful fervour. He had settled into his life-habits long ago. With the quick perception which made up for her deficiency, his mother read his face, and saw the cause was hopeless; yet with female courage and pertinacity made one effort more.</p>
			<p>“And with an excellent hard-working curate,” said the old lady⁠—“a curate whom, of course, we’d do our duty by, Morley, and who could take a great deal of the responsibility off your hands; for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leigh, though a nice young man, is not, I know, the man <i>you</i> would have chosen for such a post; and still more, my dear son⁠—we were talking of it in jest not long ago, but it is perfect earnest, and a most important matter⁠—with a good wife, Morley; a wife who would enter into all the parish work, and give you useful hints, and conduct herself as a clergyman’s wife should⁠—with such a wife⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Lucy Wodehouse!” cried the Rector, starting to his feet, and forgetting all his proprieties; “I tell you the thing is impossible. I’ll go back to All-Souls.”</p>
			<p>He sat down again doggedly, having said it. His mother sat looking at him in silence, with tears in her lively old eyes. She was saying within herself that she had seen his father take just such a “turn,” and that it was no use arguing with them under such circumstances. She watched him as women often do watch men, waiting till the creature should come to itself again and might be spoken to. The incomprehensibleness of women is an old theory, but what is that to the curious wondering observation with which wives, mothers, and sisters watch the other unreasoning animal in those moments when he has snatched the reins out of their hands, and is not to be spoken to! What he will make of it in those unassisted moments, afflicts the compassionate female understanding. It is best to let him come to, and feel his own helplessness. Such was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor’s conclusion, as, vexed, distressed, and helpless, she leant back in her chair, and wiped a few tears of disappointment and vexation out of her bright old eyes.</p>
			<p>The Rector saw this movement, and it once more excited him to speech. “But you shall have a house in Oxford, mother,” he cried⁠—“you shan’t go back to Devonshire⁠—where I can see you every day, and you can hear all that is going on. Bravo! that will be a thousand times better than Carlingford.”</p>
			<p>It was now <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor’s turn to jump up, startled, and put her hand on his mouth and point to the door. The Rector did not care for the door; he had disclosed his sentiments, he had taken his resolution, and now the sooner all was over the better for the emancipated man.</p>
			<p>Thus concluded the brief incumbency of the Reverend Morley Proctor. He returned to Oxford before his year of grace was over, and found everybody very glad to see him; and he left Carlingford with universal good wishes. The living fell to Morgan, who wanted to be married, and whose turn was much more to be a working clergyman than a classical commentator. Old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Proctor got a pretty house under shelter of the trees of <abbr>St.</abbr> Giles’s, and half the under-graduates fell in love with the old lady in the freshness of her second lifetime. Carlingford passed away like a dream from the lively old mother’s memory, and how could any reminiscences of that uncongenial locality disturb the recovered beatitude of the Fellow of All-Souls?</p>
			<p>Yet all was not so satisfactory as it appeared. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor paid for his temporary absence. All-Souls was not the Elysium it had been before that brief disastrous voyage into the world. The good man felt the stings of failure; he felt the mild jokes of his brethren in those Elysian fields. He could not help conjuring up to himself visions of Morgan with his new wife in that pretty rectory. Life, after all, did not consist of books, nor were Greek verbs essential to happiness. The strong emotion into which his own failure had roused him; the wondering silence in which he stood looking at the ministrations of Lucy Wodehouse and the young curate; the tearful sympathetic woman as helpless as himself, who had stood beside him in that sick chamber, came back upon his recollection strangely, amidst the repose, not so blessed as heretofore, of All-Souls. The good man had found out that secret of discontent which most men find out a great deal earlier than he. Something better, though it might be sadder, harder, more calamitous, was in this world. Was there ever human creature yet that had not something in him more congenial to the thorns and briars outside to be conquered, than to that mild paradise for which our primeval mother disqualified all her children? When he went back to his dear cloisters, good <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor felt that sting: a longing for the work he had rejected stirred in him⁠—a wistful recollection of the sympathy he had not sought.</p>
			<p>And if in future years any traveller, if travellers still fall upon adventures, should light upon a remote parsonage in which an elderly embarrassed Rector, with a mild wife in dove-coloured dresses, toils painfully after his duty, more and more giving his heart to it, more and more finding difficult expression for the unused faculty, let him be sure that it is the late Rector of Carlingford, self-expelled out of the uneasy paradise, setting forth untimely, yet not too late, into the laborious world.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
