<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
			<p>In a few days all this solemn crisis was over, and life went on again in its ordinary tame current, closing over the dishonoured grave where Fred found his rest, henceforward nameless in the world that had suffered his existence as a cumberer of the ground for so many years. Had he been the prop of his house and the light of their eyes, life would have gone on again, after that interruption, all the same, with a persistency which nothing can impair. As it was, the diminished household resumed its ordinary course of existence, after a very few days, with little more than outward marks of what had befallen them. It is true that Nettie sat down with a repugnance which she scarcely could either overcome or conceal, to dispense the domestic provisions at the table which shortly before had borne so dread a burden. But nobody thought of that except Nettie; and but for the black dresses and Susan’s cap, Fred was as if he had never been.</p>
			<p>About a week after the funeral, the doctor went solemnly to visit them in one of those lengthening spring afternoons. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider was undeniably nervous and excited about this interview. He had been at home under pretence of having luncheon, but in reality to make a solemn toilette, and wind himself up to the courage necessary for a settlement of affairs. As he dashed with agitated haste down Grange Lane, he saw Miss Wodehouse and her sister Lucy coming from <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s, where very probably they too had been making a visit of condolence to Nettie; and a little nearer that scene of all his cogitations and troubles appeared, a much less welcome sight, Miss Marjoribanks, whom all Carlingford, a month ago, had declared <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider to be “paying his addresses” to. The guilty doctor took off his hat to that stout and sensible wayfarer, with a pang of self-disgust which avenged Nettie. Along the very road where that little Titania, eager and rapid, had gone upon her dauntless way so often, to see that comely well-dressed figure, handsome, sprightly, clever⁠—but with such a world of bright youth, tenderness, loveliness, everything that touches the heart of man, between the two! No harm to Miss Marjoribanks; only shame to the doctor, who, out of angry love, pique, and mortification, to vex Nettie, had pretended to transfer the homage due to the fairy princess to that handsome and judicious woman. The experiment had failed as entirely as it deserved to do; and here was Edward Rider, coming back wiser and humbler, content to put that question over again, and stand once more his chance of what his pride had called a rejection, perhaps content to make still greater sacrifices, if the truth were known, and to do anything Nettie asked him, if Nettie would but condescend to ask or enter into terms at all.</p>
			<p>He drew up before <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s with a dash, which was much more of agitation than display, and, throwing the reins at the head of his little groom, leaped out like a man who did not see where he was going. He saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, however, coming out of the church, and turning round amazed to look what vehicle had come to so sudden a standstill there. All the world seemed to be on the road to <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s Cottage that spring afternoon. The doctor made a surly gesture of recognition as he passed the curate, who gazed at him in calm astonishment from the church porch. No other intruder appeared between him and the Cottage. He hurried along past the willow-trees with their drooping tassels, surrounded by a certain maze of excitement and agitation. As he went up to the door, it occurred to him suddenly how Nettie had recognised his step that dread morning of Fred’s death. The thought came like a stimulus and encouragement to the doctor. He went in with a brighter look, a heart more hopeful. She had opened the door to him before he could knock, held out to him that tiny morsel of a hand which laboured so hard and constantly, said⁠—what did Nettie say? how many times had the doctor conned it over as he went between his patients?⁠—“You were angry once, and, indeed, I don’t wonder.” The doctor went boldly in under the cordial of these simple words. If she did not wonder that he was angry once, could she think of saying over again that same conclusion which had cast him into such wrathful despair? He went in to try his fortune a second time, secure of his temper at least. <em>That</em> could never fail, nor sin against Nettie again.</p>
			<p>Edward Rider went in, expectant somehow, even against his reason, to find an altered world in that house from which Fred had gone. He knew better, to be sure, but nature beguiled the young man out of his wisdom. When he went in to the parlour his eyes were opened. Upon the sofa⁠—that same sofa where Fred had lain, all slovenly and mean in his idleness, with his pipe, polluting Nettie’s sole retirement⁠—<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred lay now in her sombre black dress, with the white cap circling her faded face. She had her white handkerchief in her hand, and was carefully arranged upon the sofa, with a chair placed near for sympathisers. At the table, working rapidly as usual, sat Nettie. Sometimes she turned a momentary glance of mingled curiosity and wonder upon her sister. Evidently she did not interfere with this development of sorrow. Nettie had enough to do, besides, with her needlework, and to enjoin a moderate amount of quietness upon Freddy and his little sister, who were building wooden bricks into houses and castles on the floor by her side. When the doctor entered the room he saw how it was with instantaneous insight. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred was sitting in state, in the pomp of woe, to receive all the compassionate people who might come to condole with her. Nettie, half impatient, half glad that her sister could amuse herself so, sat in busy toleration, putting up with it, carrying on her own work through it all⁠—and still, as always, those bonds of her own making closed hard and tenacious upon the prop of the house. Even the chance of speaking with her by herself died off into extreme distance. Young Rider, who came in with the full conviction that anger could never more rise in his heart against Nettie, grew pale with passion, resentment, and impatience before he had been a minute in the room. Always the same! Not relieved out of her bondage⁠—closer bound and prisoned than ever! He took, with an impatient involuntary commotion, the chair placed beside the sofa, and sat down in it abruptly with the briefest salutations. His hopes and anticipations all went bitterly back upon his heart. The very rustle of Nettie’s arm as she spread out that little black frock upon the table, and put on its melancholy trimmings, exasperated afresh the man who five minutes ago did not believe it possible that he ever could feel an impulse of displeasure against her again.</p>
			<p>“I cannot say that I expected to see you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, lifting her handkerchief to her eyes; “indeed, when I remember the last time you were here, I wonder you could think of coming near us. But now my poor dear Fred is gone, we have nobody to protect us⁠—and of course you don’t mind how you hurt my feelings. If you had done your duty by my poor fellow when he was living, he might never⁠—never⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred paused, choked by spiteful tears.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward, don’t mind what Susan says,” said Nettie. “It is very kind of you to come after everything⁠—If you would only tell the people not to take any notice, but just to let us go on as usual. They all want to be kind, you know⁠—they keep coming, and asking what they can do; and you understand very well there is nothing to do,” said Nettie, with a little pride. “We are just as we were before⁠—nothing is changed: one does not like to be unkind, but nobody needs to do anything. We shall get along all the same.”</p>
			<p>“So it seems, indeed,” said <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider, with irrepressible bitterness; “all the same! But, indeed, I came specially to ask what my sister-in-law meant to do,” continued the doctor, bent on one last appeal. “Now that you are left to yourself, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rider, what do you think of doing? Of course you must have some plans about the children and your future life?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred looked up at him with momentary alarm and dismay. She did not know what the question meant, but a certain vague terror seized her. It seemed to imply somehow that she was now to be left to her own resources. She gave a certain gasp of appeal to “Nettie!” and took refuge once more in her handkerchief. The doctor was desperate⁠—he had no mercy in him.</p>
			<p>“Nettie! always Nettie!” cried the young man. “And is it true, Nettie⁠—is it all the same? Are you always to go on toiling for the miserable comforts of other people? What is to become of us? Have you sold yourself to this fate?”</p>
			<p>Nettie laid down the little black frock out of her laborious hands. “You have been up all night, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward,” she said, with a certain tenderness, looking at his agitated face; “you are tired out and sick at the heart. I know it makes you say things you would not say; but after all, you know, except poor Fred, whom none of you think of, everything is the very same. I cannot make it different⁠—nothing can make it different. There is Susan plain enough to be seen⁠—and there are the children. Sometimes it has come into my mind,” said Nettie, “that as I shall never be able to afford a <em>very</em> good education for the children, it would be better to take them out to the colony again, where they might get on better than here. But it is a dreadful long voyage; and we have no near friends there, or anywhere else: and,” concluded the steadfast creature, who had dropped these last words from her lips sentence by sentence, as if eager to impress upon her own mind the arguments against that proceeding⁠—“and,” said Nettie, with wistful pathetic honesty, not able to deny the real cause of the reluctance altogether, “I don’t seem to have the heart for it now.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider started up from his chair. He went to Nettie’s side with a sudden thrill of agitation and passion. He clasped the hand with which Nettie was smoothing out that little frock, and crushed the delicate fingers in his inconsiderate grasp. “Nettie! if you must carry them always upon your shoulders, cannot we do it together, at least?” cried the doctor, carried away beyond every boundary of sense or prudence. He got down on his knees beside the table, not kneeling to her, but only compelling her attention⁠—demanding to see the answer of her eyes, the quiver of her mouth. For that moment Nettie’s defences too fell before this unlooked-for outburst of a love that had forgotten prudence. Her mouth quivered, her eyes filled. If it were possible⁠—if it were only possible!⁠—They had both forgotten the spectators who gazed with curious eyes, all unaware how deeply their own fate was involved; and that fate was still trembling in the breathless interval, when a vulgar finger touched those delicate balances of possibility, and the crisis was over, perhaps never to return.</p>
			<p>“Nettie!” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, “if Edward Rider has no respect for me, nor for my poor Fred⁠—my poor, dear, injured husband, that helped to bring him up, and gave up his practice to him, and died, as I might say, by his neglect⁠—Nettie! how can you be so cruel to your sister? How can you go taking his hand, and looking as if he were your lover? You never had any feeling for me, though everybody thinks so much of you. And now I know what I have to expect. The moment my poor dear Fred’s head is laid in the grave⁠—as soon as ever you have me in your own hands, and nobody to protect me!⁠—oh, my Fred! my Fred!⁠—as soon as you are gone, this is how they are using your poor helpless family!⁠—and soon, soon I shall die too, and you will not be encumbered with <em>me</em>!”</p>
			<p>Long before this sobbing speech was concluded, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider had risen to his feet, and was pacing through the little room with hasty steps of disgust and rage, and an agitation which overwhelmed all his attempts to master it; while Nettie sat supporting her head in her hands, pressing her fingers upon her hot eyes, beholding that fair impossible vision break and disappear from before her. Nettie’s heart groaned within her, and beat against the delicate bosom which, in its tender weakness, was mighty as a giant’s. She made no answer to her sister’s outcry, nor attempted to comfort the hysterical sobbing into which Susan fell. Nettie gave up the hopeless business without being deceived by those selfish demonstrations. She was not even fortunate enough to be able to persuade herself into admiring love and enthusiasm for those to whom necessity obliged her to give up her own life. She said nothing; she knew the sobs would subside, the end would be gained, the insignificant soul lapse into comfort, and with a sigh of compulsory resignation Nettie yielded once more to her fate.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Edward, do not think of me any more,” she said, resolutely, rising and going out to the door with him, in her simplicity and courage. “You see very well it is impossible. I know you see it as well as I do. If we could be friends as we once were, I should be very, very glad, but I don’t think it is possible just now. Don’t say anything. We both know how it is, and neither of us can help it. If we could get not to think of each other, that would be best,” said Nettie, with another sigh; “but in the mean time let us say good-bye, and speak of it no more.”</p>
			<p>If the doctor did not take his dismissal exactly so⁠—if Nettie’s identification of her own sentiments with his did lead to a warmer tenderness in that farewell, which could not be final while such a bond united them, it was at least with an absolute conviction of the impossibility of any closer union that they parted. The doctor sprang into his drag and dashed away to his patients, plunging into the work which he had somewhat neglected during that exciting day. He was not without some comfort as he went about his business with Care behind him, but that very comfort embittered the pang of the compulsory submission. To think he must leave her there with those burdens upon her delicate shoulders⁠—to believe her his, yet not his, the victim of an unnatural bondage⁠—drove Edward Rider desperate as he devoured the way. A hundred times in an hour he made up his mind to hasten back again and snatch her forcibly out of that thraldom, and yet a hundred times had to fall back consuming his heart with fiery irritation, and chafing at all that seemed duty and necessity to Nettie. As he was proceeding on his troubled way it occurred to him to meet⁠—surely everybody in Carlingford was out of doors this particular afternoon!⁠—that prosperous wife, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> John Brown, who had once been Bessie Christian. She was a very pale apparition now to the doctor, engrossed as he was with an influence much more imperious and enthralling than hers had ever been; but the sight of her, on this day of all others, was not without its effect upon Edward Rider. Had not she too been burdened with responsibilities which the doctor would not venture to take upon his shoulders, but which another man, more daring, <em>had</em> taken, and rendered bearable? As the thought of that possibility occurred to him, a sudden vision of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred’s faded figure flashed across his eyes. In the excitement of the moment he touched too sharply with his whip that horse which had suffered the penalty of most of his vagaries of temper and imagination for some time past. The long-suffering beast was aggravated out of patience by that unexpected irritation. It was all the doctor could do for the next ten minutes to keep his seat and his command over the exasperated animal, whose sudden frenzy terrified <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brown, and drove her to take refuge in the nearest shop. How little the Carlingford public, who paused at a respectful distance to look on, guessed those emotions which moved the doctor as they watched him subduing his rebellious horse with vigorous arm and passionate looks! Bessie, with a little palpitation at her heart, could not refrain from a passing wonder whether the sight of herself had anything to do with that sudden conflict. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Brown knew little about <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s Cottage, but had heard of Miss Marjoribanks, who it was not to be supposed could hold a very absolute sway over the doctor. Meanwhile <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider struggled with his horse with all the intensity of determination with which he would have struggled against his fate had that been practicable. With set teeth and eyes that blazed with sudden rage and resolution, he subdued the unruly brute, and forced it to acknowledge his mastery. When he drove the vanquished animal, all quivering with pain and passion, on its further course, the struggle had refreshed his mind a little. Ah, if life and adverse fortune could but be vanquished so!⁠—but all Edward Rider’s resolution and courage died into hopeless disgust before the recollection of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred upon that sofa. Even with Nettie at one hand, that peevish phantom on the other, those heartless imps in insolent possession of the wonderful little guardian who would not forsake them, made up a picture which made the doctor’s heart sick. No! Nettie was right. It was impossible. Love, patience, charity, after all, are but human qualities, when they have to be held against daily disgusts, irritations, and miseries. The doctor knew as well as Nettie did that he could not bear it. He knew even, as perhaps Nettie did not know, that her own image would suffer from the association; and that a man so faulty and imperfect as himself could not long refrain from resenting upon his wife the dismal restraints of such a burden. With a self-disgust which was most cutting of all, Edward Rider felt that he should descend to that injustice; and that not even Nettie herself would be safe against the effusions of his impatience and indignation. All through the course of this exciting episode in his life, his own foresight and knowledge of himself had been torture to the doctor, and had brought him, in addition to all other trials, silent agonies of self-contempt which nobody could guess. But he could not alter his nature. He went through his day’s work very wretched and dejected, yet with an ineffable touch of secret comfort behind all, which sometimes would look him in the face for a moment like a passing sunbeam, yet sometimes seemed to exasperate beyond bearing the tantalising misery of his fate. A more agitated, disturbed, passionate, and self-consuming man than the doctor was not in Carlingford, nor within a hundred miles; yet it was not perfect wretchedness after all.</p>
			<p>Nettie, on her part, went back to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred in the parlour after she had parted from Edward Rider, with feelings somewhat different from the doctor’s. Perhaps she too had indulged a certain pang of expectation as to what might follow after Fred was gone, in the new world that should be after that change; for Nettie, with all her wisdom of experience, was still too young not to believe that circumstances did change everything now and then, even dispositions and hearts. But before <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider knew it⁠—before he had even wound up his courage to the pitch of asking what was now to happen to them⁠—the little Australian had made up her mind to that which was inevitable. The same Susan whose ceaseless discontents and selfish love had driven Nettie across the seas to look for Fred, was now reposing on that sofa in her widow’s cap, altogether unchanged, as helpless and unabandonable, as dependent, as much a fool as ever. The superior wretchedness of Fred’s presence and life had partially veiled Susan’s character since they came to Carlingford. Now she had the field to herself again, and Nettie recognised at once the familiar picture. From the moment when Susan in her mourning came down-stairs, Nettie acknowledged the weakness of circumstances, the pertinacity of nature. What could she do?⁠—she gave up the scarcely-formed germ of hope that had begun to appear in her breast. She made up her mind silently to what must be. No agonies of martyrdom could have made Nettie desert her post and abandon these helpless souls. They could do nothing for themselves, old or young of them; and who was there to do it all? she asked herself, with that perpetual reference to necessity which was Nettie’s sole process of reasoning on the subject. Thus considered, the arguments were short and telling, the conclusion unmistakable. Here was this visible piece of business⁠—four helpless creatures to be supported and provided and thrust through life somehow⁠—with nobody in the world but Nettie to do it; to bring them daily bread and hourly tendance, to keep them alive, and shelter their helplessness with refuge and protection. She drew up her tiny Titania figure, and put back her silken flood of hair, and stood upright to the full extent of her little stature, when she recognised the truth. Nobody could share with her that warfare which was hard to flesh and blood. There was nothing to be said on the subject⁠—no possibility of help. She was almost glad when that interview, which she foresaw, was over, and when Edward had recognised as well as herself the necessities of the matter. She went back again out of the little hall where, for one moment and no more, the lights of youth and love had flushed over Nettie, suffusing her paleness with rose-blushes. Now it was all over. The romance was ended, the hero gone, and life had begun anew.</p>
			<p>“I can’t say I ever liked this place,” sighed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, when the lamp was lit that evening, and Nettie had come down-stairs again after seeing the children in bed. “It was always dull and dreary to me. If we hadn’t been so far out of Carlingford, things might have been very different. My poor Fred! instead of taking care of him, all the dangers that ever could be were put in his way.”</p>
			<p>This sentence was concluded by some weeping, of which, however, Nettie did not take any notice. Making mourning by lamp-light is hard work, as all poor seamstresses know. Nettie had no tears in the eyes that were fixed intently upon the little coat which was to complete Freddy’s outfit; and she did not even look up from that urgent occupation to deprecate Susan’s tears.</p>
			<p>“I tell you, Nettie, I never could bear this place,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred; “and now, whenever I move, the dreadful thoughts that come into my mind are enough to kill me. You always were strong from a baby, and of course it is not to be expected that you can understand what my feelings are. And <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith is anything but kind, or indeed civil, sometimes; and I don’t think I could live through another of these cold English winters. I am sure I never could keep alive through another winter, now my poor Fred’s gone.”</p>
			<p>“Well?” asked Nettie, with involuntary harshness in her voice.</p>
			<p>“I don’t care for myself,” sobbed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, “but it’s dreadful to see you so unfeeling, and to think what would become of his poor children if anything were to happen to me. I do believe you would marry Edward Rider if it were not for me, and go and wrong the poor children, and leave them destitute. Nobody has the feeling for them that a mother has; but if I live another winter in England, I know I shall die.”</p>
			<p>“You have thought of dying a great many times,” said Nettie, “but it has never come to anything. Never mind that just now. What do you want? Do you want me to take you back to the colony all these thousands of miles, after so many expenses as there have been already?⁠—or what is it you want me to do?”</p>
			<p>“You always speak of expenses, Nettie: you are very poor-spirited, though people think so much of you,” said Susan; “and don’t you think it is natural I should wish to go home, now my poor Fred has been taken away from me? And you confessed it would be best for the children. We know scarcely anybody here, and the very sight of <em>that</em> Edward that was so cruel to my poor Fred⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Susan, don’t be a fool,” said Nettie; “you know better in your heart. If you will tell me plainly what you want, I shall listen to you; but if not, I will go up-stairs and put away Freddy’s things. Only one thing I may tell you at once; you may leave Carlingford if you please, but I shall not. I cannot take you back again to have you ill all the way, and the children threatening to fall overboard twenty times in a day. I did it once, but I will not do it again.”</p>
			<p>“You <em>will</em> not?” cried Susan. “Ah, I know what you mean: I know very well what you mean. You think Edward Rider⁠—”</p>
			<p>Nettie rose up and faced her sister with a little gasp of resolution which frightened <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred. “I don’t intend to have anything said about Edward Rider,” said Nettie; “he has nothing to do with it one way or another. I tell you what I told him, that I have not the heart to carry you all back again; and I cannot afford it either; and if you want anything more, Susan,” added the peremptory creature, flashing forth into something of her old spirit, “I shan’t go⁠—and that is surely enough.”</p>
			<p>With which words Nettie went off like a little sprite to put away Freddy’s coat, newly completed, along with the other articles of his wardrobe, at which she had been working all day. In that momentary impulse of decision and self-will a few notes of a song came unawares from Nettie’s lip, as she glanced, light and rapid as a fairy, up-stairs. She stopped a minute after with a sigh. Were Nettie’s singing days over? She had at least come at last to find her life hard, and to acknowledge that this necessity which was laid upon her was grievous by times to flesh and blood; but not the less for that did she arrange Freddy’s little garments daintily in the drawers, and pause, before she went down-stairs again, to cover him up in his little bed.</p>
			<p>Susan still sat pondering and crying over the fire. Her tears were a great resource to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred. They occupied her when she had nothing else to occupy herself with; and when she cast a weeping glance up from her handkerchief to see Nettie draw her chair again to the table, and lay down a little pile of pinafores and tuckers which required supervision, Susan wept still more, and said it was well to be Nettie, who never was overcome by her feelings. Thus the evening passed dully enough. Just then, perhaps, Nettie was not a very conversable companion. Such interviews as that of this day linger in the heads of the interlocutors, and perhaps produce more notable effects afterwards than at the moment. Nettie was not thinking about it. She was simply going over it again, finding out the tones and meanings which, in the haste and excitement of their occurrence, did not have their full force. The fulness of detail that lingers about such pictures, which are not half apprehended till they have been gone over again and again, is marvellous. The pinafores went unconsciously through Nettie’s fingers. She was scarcely aware of Susan crying by the fire. Though it had been in some degree a final and almost hopeless parting, there was comfort behind the cloud to Nettie as well as to the doctor. She had forgotten all about the discussion with which the evening began before Susan spoke again.</p>
			<p>“Richard Chatham came home with the last mail,” said Susan, making a feeble effort to renew the fight. “He sent me a letter last week, you know. I daresay he will come to see us. Richard Chatham from Melbourne, Nettie. I daresay he will not stay out of the colony long.”</p>
			<p>Nettie, who was lost in her own thoughts, made no reply.</p>
			<p>“I daresay,” repeated <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, “he will be going out again in a month or two. I do not believe he could bear this dreadful English winter any more than I could. I daresay he’d be glad to take care of us out⁠—if you should change your mind about going, Nettie.”</p>
			<p>Nettie gave her sister a glance of resolution and impatience⁠—a swift glance upward from her work, enough to show she marked and understood⁠—but still did not speak.</p>
			<p>“Richard Chatham was always very good-natured: it would be such a good thing for us to go in the same ship⁠—if you should happen to change your mind about going, Nettie,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred, rising to retire to her room. “I am going to bed to try to get a little sleep. Such wretched nights as I have would kill anybody. I should not wonder if Richard Chatham came some of these days to see us. Poor fellow! he had always a great fancy for <em>our</em> family; and it would be <em>such</em> a thing for us, Nettie, if you should change your mind about going, to go in the same ship!”</p>
			<p>With which Parthian shot <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred made her way up-stairs and retired from the field. Nettie woke with a startled consciousness out of her dreams, to perceive that here was the process of iteration begun which drives the wisest to do the will of fools. She woke up to it for a moment, and, raising her drooping head, watched her sister make her way, with her handkerchief in her hand, and the broad white bands of her cap streaming over her shoulders, to the door. Susan stole a glance round before she disappeared, to catch the startled glance of that resolute little face, only half woke up, but wholly determined. Though <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fred dared not say another word at that moment, she disappeared full of the conviction that her arrow had told, and that the endless persistence with which she herself, a woman and a fool, was gifted, need only be duly exercised to win the day. When Susan was gone, that parting arrow did quiver for a moment in Nettie’s heart; but the brave little girl had, for that one night, a protection which her sister wist not of. After the door closed, Nettie fell back once more into that hour of existence which expanded and opened out the more for every new approach which memory made to it. Sweet nature, gentle youth, and the Magician greater than either, came round her in a potent circle and defended Nettie. The woman was better off than the man in this hour of their separation, yet union. He chafed at the consolation which was but visionary; she, perhaps, in that visionary, ineffable solacement found a happiness greater than any reality could ever give.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
