<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
			<p>“Take me down this long pretty road. There must be delicious houses inside the walls. Look here; drive slowly, and let us have a peep in at this open door,” said Nettie. “How sweet and cosy! and who is that pretty young lady coming out? I saw her in the chapel this morning. Oh,” added Nettie, with a little sharpness, “she knows <em>you</em>⁠—tell me who she is.”</p>
			<p>“That is Miss Lucy Wodehouse⁠—one of our Carlingford beauties,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider.</p>
			<p>“Do you know her very well?” asked the inquisitive Nettie. “How she stares⁠—why does she stare, do you suppose? Is there anything absurd about my dress? Look here⁠—don’t they wear bonnets just like this in England?”</p>
			<p>“So far as I am able to judge,” said the doctor, looking at the tiny head overladen with hair, from which the bonnet had fallen half off.</p>
			<p>“I suppose she is surprised to see me here. Drive on faster, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Edward, I want to talk to you. I see Fred has been telling us a parcel of stories. It would be cruel to tell Susan, you know, for she believes in him; but you may quite trust me. Is your brother good for anything, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Edward, do you suppose?”</p>
			<p>“Not very much now, I fear,” said the doctor.</p>
			<p>“Not very much <em>now</em>. I suppose he never was good for much,” said the indignant Nettie; “but he was said to be very clever when he first came out to the colony. I can’t tell why Susan married him. She is very self-willed, though you would fancy her so submissive. She is one of those people, you know, who fall ill when they are crossed, and threaten to die, so that one daren’t cross her. Now, then, what is to be done with them? He will not go back to the colony, and I don’t care to do it myself. Must I keep them here?”</p>
			<p>“Miss Underwood⁠—” began the perplexed doctor.</p>
			<p>“It would save trouble to call me Nettie⁠—everybody does,” said his strange companion; “besides, you are my brother in a kind of a way, and the only person I can consult with; for, of course, it would not do to tell one’s difficulties to strangers. Fred may not be very much to depend upon, you know, but still he is Fred.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the doctor, with a little self-reproach, “still he is Fred; but pardon me, the name suggests long aggravations. You can’t tell how often I have had to put up with affronts and injuries because it was Fred. I shouldn’t like to grieve you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Never mind about grieving me;⁠—<em>I</em> am not in love with him;⁠—let me hear all about it!” said Nettie.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider paused a little; seeing the abyss upon the brink of which this brave little girl was standing, he had not the heart to aggravate her by telling the failures of the past. Better to soften the inevitable discovery if possible. But his hesitation was quite apparent to Nettie. With considerable impatience she turned round upon him.</p>
			<p>“If you think I don’t know what I am doing, but have gone into this business like a fool, you are quite mistaken, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Edward,” she said, a little sharply. “I see how it is as well as anybody can do. I knew how it was when I left the colony. Don’t be alarmed about me. Do you think I am to be turned against my own flesh and blood by finding out their follies; or to grumble at the place God put me in?⁠—Nothing of the sort! I know the kind of situation perfectly⁠—but one <em>may</em> make the best of it, you know: and for that reason tell me everything, please.”</p>
			<p>“But, Miss Underwood, consider,” cried the doctor, in consternation. “You are taking responsibilities upon yourself which nobody could lay upon you; you! young⁠—tender” (the doctor paused for a word, afraid to be too complimentary)⁠—“delicate! Why, the whole burden of this family will come upon you. There is not one able to help himself in the whole bundle! I am shocked!⁠—I am alarmed!⁠—I don’t know what to say to you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t say anything, please,” said Nettie. “I know what I am about. Do you call this a street or a lane, or what do you call it? Oh, such nice houses! shouldn’t I like to be able to afford to have one of them, and nurses, and governesses, and everything proper for the children! I should like to dress them so nicely, and give them such a good education. I don’t know anything particular to speak of, myself⁠—I shall never be able to teach them when they grow older. If Fred, now, was only to be trusted, and would go and work like a man and make something for the children, I daresay I could keep up the house;⁠—but if he won’t do anything, you know, it will take us every farthing just to live. Look here, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Edward: I have two hundred a-year;⁠—Susan had the same, you know, but Fred got all the money when they were married, and muddled it away. Now, how much can one do in Carlingford with three children upon two hundred a-year?”</p>
			<p>“Fred will be the meanest blackguard in existence,” cried the doctor, “if he takes his living from you.”</p>
			<p>“He took his living from <em>you</em>, it appears,” said Nettie, coolly, “and did not thank you much. We must make the best of him. We can’t help ourselves. Now, there is the pretty church, and there is our little house. Come in with me and answer for me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Edward. You can say I am your sister-in-law, you know, and then, perhaps, we can get into possession at once; for,” said Nettie, suddenly turning round upon the doctor with her brilliant eyes shining out quaintly under the little brow all puckered into curves of foresight, “it is so sadly expensive living where we are now.”</p>
			<p>To look at the creature thus flashing those shining eyes, not without a smile lurking in their depths, upon him⁠—to see the triumphant, undaunted, undoubting youthfulness which never dreamt of failure⁠—to note that pretty anxiety, the look which might have become a bride in her first troubles “playing at housekeeping,” and think how desperate was the position she had assumed, how dreary the burden she had taken upon her⁠—was almost too much for the doctor’s self-control. He did not know whether to admire the little heroine as half-divine, or to turn from her as half-crazy. Probably, had the strange little spirit possessed a different frame, the latter was the sentiment which would have influenced the unimaginative mind of Edward Rider. But there was no resisting that little brown Titania, with her little head overladen with its beautiful hair, her red, delicate mouth closing firm and sweet above that little decided chin, her eyes which seemed to concentrate the light. She seemed only a featherweight when the bewildered doctor helped her to alight⁠—an undoubted sprite and creature of romance. But to hear her arranging about all the domestic necessities within, and disclosing her future plans for the children, and all the order of that life of which she took the charge so unhesitatingly, bewildered the mistress of the house as much as it did the wondering doctor. The two together stood gazing at her as she moved about the room, pouring forth floods of eager talk. Her words were almost as rapid as her step⁠—her foot, light as it was, almost as decided and firm as her resolutions. She was a wonder to behold as she pushed about the furniture, and considered how it could be brightened up and made more comfortable. Gazing at her with his silent lips apart, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider sighed at the word. Comfortable! Was she to give her mind to making Fred and his children comfortable⁠—such a creature as this? Involuntarily it occurred to Edward that, under such ministrations, sundry changes might come over the aspect of that prim apartment in which he had seen her first; the room with the bookcase and the red curtains, and the prints over the mantelpiece⁠—a very tidy, comfortable room before any bewitching imp came to haunt it, and whisper suspicions of its imperfection⁠—the doctor’s own retirement, where he had chewed the cud of sweet and bitter fancies often enough, without much thought of his surroundings. But Nettie now had taken possession of the prosaic place, and, all unconscious of that spiritual occupation, was as busy and as excited about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith’s lodgings at <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s Cottage as if it were an ideal home she was preparing, and the life to be lived in it was the brightest and most hopeful in the world.</p>
			<p>When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Rider reached home that night, and took his lonely meal in his lonely room, certain bitter thoughts of unequal fortune occupied the young man’s mind. Let a fellow be but useless, thankless, and heartless enough, and people spring up on all sides to do his work for him, said the doctor to himself, with a bitterness as natural as it was untrue. The more worthless a fellow is, the more all the women connected with him cling to him and make excuses for him, said Edward Rider in his indignant heart. Mother and sister in the past⁠—wife and Nettie now⁠—to think how Fred had secured for himself such perpetual ministrations, by neglecting all the duties of life! No wonder an indignant pang transfixed the lonely bosom of the virtuous doctor, solitary and unconsoled as he was. <em>His</em> laborious days knew no such solace. And as he fretted and pondered, no visions of Bessie Christian perplexed his thoughts. He had forgotten that young woman. All his mind was fully occupied chafing at the sacrifice of Nettie. He was not sorry, he was angry, to think of her odd position, and the duties she had taken upon herself. What had she to do with those wretched children, and that faded spiteful mother? Edward Rider was supremely disgusted. He said to himself, with the highest moral indignation, that such a girl ought not to be permitted to tie herself to such a fate.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
